Anthropology
ANTH 101 Introduction to Cultural
Anthropology (3 sem. hrs.)
Introduction to the general field of anthropology,
including reviews of scientific theories as basis of
the academic research, as well as social, cultural,
ethnographic and methodological topics which
refer to the discipline. The course includes a study
of diversity and similarity of behavior patterns,
values, traditions, economical systems and
customs of people in different cultural contexts-
present and past. The focus will be to enhance
students understanding of human nature. This will
be derived from the investigation of the variety
and range of socially standardized responses to the
circumstances of human living. Such insight
transcends a culture- bound approach, which
views things from the narrow perspective of one’s
native cultural background. In each aspect of
human culture this introduction seeks to provide
an appreciation of other cultures as well an
understanding of our values attitudes within
society, lastly it reflects the perspective of our
Christian faith toward society.

Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0 or 3-0)

ANTH 205 Race and Ethnicity (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course introduces students to the concept of
race and ethnicity and to the major theories that
the discipline employs as a means of
understanding race and ethnic relations.

Cross-listed: SOCI 210.
Prerequisite(s): SOCI 101 or ANTH 101.

ANTH 210 Islamic Culture (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course is designed as an introduction to the
religion of Islam and the Muslim cultures.
It’s a basic overview/ survey of the most
influential denominations of Islamic faith, like
Sunna, Shia, Ismailia, Druze, Alavites and
Ahmadyia. In the course we will examine the
history of Islamic religion and the different
theological and juristic schools like the Hanafits,
Shafiites, Malekites and Hanibalites, as well the
practice and pillars of Islam with particular


                                                 138
attention to the classic texts of Qu’ran and Hadith.
The course will also analyze the role of Jesus in
the Qu’ran as well compare stories written in the
Bible.

Students are invited into using the disciplines of
anthropology/sociology as possibility of inquiry,
evaluation and interpretation. Through analyzing
concepts of religious belief systems students
experience the social world around them, by
interacting with norms, beliefs and values of
global and local cultures.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): None. (0-0; 3-0)

ANTH 302 Cross-cultural
Communication (3 sem. hrs.)
This course is about the nature of cross-cultural
interaction. Cultural concepts and contexts are
explored through taxonomies, theories, and
comparative analysis. Through in-class and out-of-
class activities, students become self-aware and
other-aware. Students also experiment with
cultural behaviours and cultural change, aiming to
increase both explanatory and predictive cultural
knowledge, and enhance behavioural
competencies.

Cross-listed: MCOM 372; LING 302.
Prerequisite(s): ANTH 101 or instructor’s
consent. (0-0; 3-0)

ANTH 350 Urban Studies (3 sem. hrs.)
This course examines the evolution of the city,
from its earliest pre-industrial roots to cities of the
New Economy, and provides a sociological
analysis of selected urban social issues. The course
explores the urban effect on society and the
various efforts, past and present, to make cities
more livable.

Cross-listed: SOCI 350.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of Sociology or
Anthropology.

ANTH 390 Special Topics in
Anthropology (3 sem. hrs.)
An examination of selected topics and theories
within the field of anthropology.
Prerequisite(s): ANTH 101 or instructor’s
consent (3-0 or 3-0)

ANTH 395 Indigenous Peoples in
Canada (3 sem. hrs.)
This course is an introduction to the culture,
languages, history and enduring presence of First
Nation people in Canada. It will explore a range of
indigenous social and cultural formations.
Attention will be given to the cultural, economic,
political, and religious aspects of First Nation
societies, as well as the changes that have occurred
since the arrival of the Europeans.

Cross-listed: SOCI 395.
Prerequisite(s): ANTH 101 or SOCI 101.

ANTH 452 Leadership
Communication in Multicultural
Contexts (3 sem. hrs.)
Students explore the complexities of leadership
communication in multi-cultural, non-western
contexts through topics such as gender and social
structures, motivation, decision-making,
negotiating conflict, and managing projects and
change. The course draws on leadership theories,
metaphors, and global leadership research to
define culturally preferred leadership attributes
and behaviours, and effective cross-cultural
communication in comparative global settings.

NB: Summer session only in Guatemala or
Kenya.
Cross-listed: MCOM 472.
Prerequisite: ANTH 302.

ANTH 470 Linguistic Field Methods:
Language and Culture Learning (3
sem. hrs.)
An introduction to various facets of linguistic field
work with an emphasis on language acquisition.
Students develop self-directed strategies based on
personal learning styles. Various topics related to
field work include text collection, cultural
journaling, and technical writing. Practical
experience in the above topics is gained by
working with a speaker of a non-Indo-European
language. Additional work includes phonological
and grammatical analysis of this language.




                                                 139
Co-requisite(s): LING 460, 480.
Cross-listed: LING 470.
Prerequisite(s): LING 210, 310, 330, 360; or
instructor’s consent. (3-2; 0-0)



Art + Design
ART 140 Introduction to Printmaking
(3 sem. hrs.)
This studio course introduces the basic application
and procedures of two traditional methods of
printmaking–relief and screen printing. The course
is designed to provide a positive studio experience
for non-art students interested in art and its
application to popular culture. This course is
similar to ART 240, but is intended for non-art
majors; therefore ART 140 and ART 240 may not
both be taken for credit.

NB: Not offered every year.
Prerequisite(s): None. (0-3 or 0-3)

ART 150 Creative Thinking (3 sem.
hrs.)
In this interdisciplinary course, students will gain
experience with a wide range of creative thinking
practices with a focus on ideation techniques and
creative problem-solving methodologies, such as
design thinking. Students will apply creative
problem-solving techniques to complex problems
and personal interests while learning about the
history, key players, and processes that have led to
our contemporary understanding of creativity.
Students will develop their capacity for flexible
and original thinking, and will begin cultivating
habits that support their ability to quickly adapt
and innovate in our rapidly changing world.

Prerequisite(s): None. (0-3; 0-3)

ART 180 Integration Forum (0 sem.
hrs.)
A seminar for students in all levels of the
program, this course is required for all majors
each semester (concentrations and minors are
encouraged to attend). The core of the class is a
visiting lecture series facilitating presentations,
critiques, and communication amongst local
artists, faculty, and students. The class covers
topical issues in art; facilitates communication
regarding departmental and professional practices;
creates a community of inquiry supporting one
another’s production; addresses issues common to
students of art; and supports the integration of
faith and art in preparation for a life in the arts.

Prerequisite(s): None.

ART 181 Visual Foundations I (3 sem.
hrs.)
This foundations-level studio course invites
students to explore artistic practice as a mode of
inquiry and a meaning-making language. The
course cultivates visual intelligence through
carefully sequenced drawing exercises, illustrated
lectures and readings. Perceptual, conceptual and
technical skills are honed, and elements of art and
principles of design are explored through drawing
and composition projects that give students an
experiential understanding of a wide range of art-
making paradigms.

Prerequisite(s): None. (0-3; 0-3)

ART 182 Visual Foundations II (3 sem.
hrs.)
Introductory studio course that invites students
into the investigation of colour and its interaction,
time and space arts, and three-dimensional art.
Through the immersive practice of developing of
artwork, students experience art as a mode of
inquiry where meaning is understood through
intuitive, imaginative, creative and interpretive
methodologies. Using foundational skills, students
employ critical and creative thinking that reflects
fluency and flexibility of imagination and
expression to create art and make new
connections or respond to a chosen problem,
concept or question.

Prerequisite(s): None. (0-0; 0-3)

ART 211 Life Drawing I (3 sem. hrs.)
Through this intensive investigation into life
drawing, students develop perceptual awareness,
build an expressive visual vocabulary and critically
examine how cultural stereotypes inscribe and
politicize the body. Anatomical, aesthetic,
perceptual, critical and conceptual inquiries are
explored. Students examine the ways in which


                                                 140
culture, society and theology influence imaging the
body.

Prerequisite(s): ART 181 and one of ART 237
or 238. (0-3 or 0-3)

ART 215 Beauty and the Sacred CP (3
sem. hrs.)
Do the Ten Commandments forbid Christian art?
What, if anything, can images, music, architecture,
dance, or film uniquely communicate about God?
Does, as Hans Urs von Balthasar writes, every
experience of beauty point toward the infinite? An
introduction to theological aesthetics, this class
queries the extent to which various aspects of
Christian belief can and cannot be adequately
apprehended through the senses. Engaging with a
wide range of perspectives and artistic media,
particular emphasis will be placed upon the history
and significance of distinctively Christian works of
art.

NB: Course taught at Catholic Pacific College, an
approved TWU learning centre.
Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0 or 3-0)

ART 221 Painting I (3 sem. hrs.)
This studio course focuses on the acquisition of
basic painting skills. Colour theory is used in
increasingly intentional ways as students explore
strategies of using picture plane, shape, plane,
volume, and brushstroke. Students are involved in
issues of how personal voice and concerns
translate into painting practices.

Prerequisite(s): ART 182 and one of: ART 237,
238, or SAMC 112. (0-3 or 0-3)

ART 230 Photography (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to photographic art - students
explore basic techniques of digital and traditional
photography. These include, but are not limited
to: composition, visual literacy, lighting, review of
darkroom procedures, and production.
Photographic theory is introduced as it relates to
cultural, aesthetic, ethical, and theological matters.
Prerequisite(s): None. (0-3 or 0-3)

ART 231 Foundations of Animation (3
sem. hrs.)
An introduction to the foundational principles and
practices of animation. While students will focus
on 2D animation in frequent practical exercises,
their acquired skills and theory will be
foundational for doing 3D animation. This course
is a prerequisite for any subsequent animation
courses.

Cross-listed: GAME 231.
Prerequisite(s): ART 181 or 182; ART 211 or
212; ART 250.

ART 232 Foundations of 3D Graphics
(3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to the foundational principles and
practices of 3D computer animation. Working in
a lab setting, students will develop the basic
conceptual and technical tools necessary to create
and modify elements for game development. This
course is a prerequisite for any subsequent
animation courses.

Cross-listed: GAME 232.
Prerequisite(s): GAME/ART 231.

ART 237 History of Western Art (3
sem. hrs.)
An introductory survey inviting students, as a
mode of inquiry, to explore, examine, analyze and
appreciate specific historical visual images,
sculptural objects, and architectural structures. It
traces thematically and chronologically some of
the major developments that have influenced both
western and eastern cultures from prehistoric cave
painting to the fifteenth century. Students employ
historical means and methods (notably artworks as
important historical documents complementing
written texts) to question, in a systematic and
rigorous way, and to interpret the ways in which
particular works of art participate in the social,
political, economic, religious and cultural climates
of which they have been an integral part learning.

Prerequisites: None. (3-0; 0-0)

ART 238 History of Western Art II (3
sem. hrs.)
An introductory survey inviting students, as a
mode of inquiry, to explore, examine, analyze and
appreciate specific historical visual images,
sculptural objects, and architectural structures. It


                                                 141
traces thematically and chronologically some of
the major developments that have influenced
Western cultures from the Renaissance to the
present. Students employ historical means and
methods (notably artworks as important historical
documents complementing written texts) to
question, in a systematic and rigorous way, and to
interpret the ways in which particular works of art
participate in the social, political, economic,
religious and cultural climates of which they have
been an integral part learning.

Prerequisite(s): None. (0-0; 3-0)

ART 240 Printmaking I (3 sem. hrs.)
This studio course introduces the basic
applications and procedures of printmaking
through the medium of screen printing. The class
covers black and white, colour separation,
editioning, registration, proofing, and printing,
integrating technical ability with conceptual
development during the execution of each project.

NB: Not offered every year.
Prerequisite(s): ART 181 or 182; ART 237 or
238; and SAMC 112. (0-3 or 0-3)

ART 250 Foundations in Digital
Design (3 sem. hrs.)
An active exploration of graphic design essentials,
creative ideation methods, and visual
communication techniques. Students use creative
thinking methodologies to experiment with a wide
range of design approaches, evaluate the aesthetic
and conceptual value of specific design solutions,
and sharpen their creative, critical thinking, and
perceptual skills.

NB: Priority given to Art + Design and Media
and Communication students.
Cross-listed: MCOM 231.
Prerequisite(s): None. (0-3 or 0-3)

ART 280 3D Design (3 sem. hrs.)
The course investigates three-dimensional design
and overviews the various stages in the process of
design from ideation and planning to production.
Through a study of the properties and
characteristics of objects within cultures, students
focus on relationships between form, function,
ideas and ideologies.
NB: Not offered every year.
Prerequisite(s): None. (0-3 or 0-3)

ART 283 Sculpture I (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to working in three dimensions in
a variety of media, including clay, wood, and
metal. Historical and contemporary approaches to
sculpture are examined to achieve an
understanding of the relationship of materials to
form, space, expressive content, and the
construction of meaning.

NB: Not offered every year.
Prerequisite(s): ART 181 or 182, and ART 237
or 238. (0-3 or 0-3)

ART 290 Special Topics in Art (3 sem.
hrs.)
Topics vary from year to year.

NB: Not offered every semester. Course may be
repeated.
Prerequisite(s): None. (0-3 or 0-3)

ART 305, 306, 307 Art Field Placement
(1, 2 or 3 sem. hr.)
In this art-related work experience, students are
invited into embodied and experiential inquiry.
Students immerse themselves into a hands-on
investigation of professional practices while being
mentored by practicing artists and other art
professionals in areas of creative and critical
expertise. This participatory experience may
include guidance from artists, art historians, art
institutions, designers, art therapists, and others.

NB: Course may be repeated.
Prerequisite(s): Art + Design major,
concentration, or minor, and third or fourth year
standing; or instructor’s consent. (0-1 or 0-1)

ART 310 Drawing (3 sem. hrs.)
Students explore inquiry-based perceptual,
abstract, conceptual, and performative definitions
of contemporary drawing practice. The criteria for
defining, analyzing, interpreting, and evaluating
drawings are widened to embrace current
theoretical frameworks. Issues and themes of
drawing practice after the initial decades of
postmodernism are the focus of student
inquiries/projects.


                                                 142
NB: Not offered every year.
Prerequisite(s): ART 211 or 212. (0-3 or 0-3)

ART 321 Abstract Painting (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course provides an in-depth look at the
integration of theory and practice surrounding
historical and contemporary abstract painting. Art
elements and principles, particularly colour, are
used with increasing specificity and intentionality.
Students investigate how aesthetic choices realized
on a canvas reveal the artist’s position within art,
culture, and political history.

Prerequisite(s): ART 221 or 222. (0-3 or 0-3)

ART 327 Modern Art History I (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course traces the diverse artistic movements
that developed in urban centres throughout
Europe from The Great Exhibition of 1851 in
London to the Dada movement in Zurich in the
1920s. Students consider the changing role of the
artist and the way in which both the subject matter
and the stylistic treatment of their art are shaped
by and are a response to this modern world.

NB: Not offered every semester.
Prerequisite(s): ART 237 or ART 238. (3-0; 0-0)

ART 328 Modern Art History II (3
sem. hrs.)
This course explores how art strategies (in
traditional mediums such as painting, sculpture,
and architecture, as well as film, video,
performance) and the critical debates that arose in
Europe and North America in the aftermath of
the First World War to the present day, reflect the
social, economic, and political context charting the
rise and fall of modernism and the transition to
postmodern practices within the visual arts. The
role of art in society, its relationship to mass
culture, and what is at stake in maintaining socially
engaged art today are considered.

NB: Not offered every semester.
Prerequisite(s): ART 237 or ART 238 or SAMC
112. (0-0; 3-0)
ART 330 Photographic Vision (3 sem.
hrs.)
Cultivating an informed engagement with our
predominantly visual culture, this course combines
photographic technical skill (composition, lighting,
darkroom procedures, etc.) with informed cultural
photographic theory relating to aesthetic, ethical,
and theological issues. Participants are encouraged
to embody a re-visioning as photographers and
thinkers who embrace a Christian view of the
world and its inhabitants.

NB: Not offered every year.
Prerequisite(s): 3 sem. hrs. of ART and ART
230. (0-0; 0-3)

ART 331 Video Game Art (3 sem. hrs.)
A critical evaluation of the deployment of visual
art in video games. Student will develop a broad
appreciation for the incredible variety of video
game art and consider the spiritual, moral, and
ethical issues surrounding visual design choices in
game development. Students will engage theories
and tools that will enhance student participation in
development projects.
Cross-Listed: GAME 331.
Prerequisite(s): Second year standing or higher.

ART 332 Advanced Animation Projects
(3 sem. hrs.)
A continuation of the foundational animation
courses. Students will research animation
techniques and aesthetics and then develop a plan
in consultation with the instructor for a semester-
long project. Students will build on their existing
animation skills and aesthetic judgement as well as
gain a wider appreciation for what is possible with
animation, whether computerized or otherwise.

Cross-Listed: GAME 332.
Prerequisite(s): GAME/ART 231.

ART 340 Printmaking II (3 sem. hrs.)
Printmaking is explored historically, and as a
vehicle for critical inquiry and self-expression.
Critical, theoretical, and practical aspects of relief
printmaking are studied.

NB: Not offered every year.
Prerequisite(s): ART 240 and 6 sem. hrs. of
ART, or instructor’s consent. (0-0; 0-3)


                                                   143
ART 351 Intermedia (3 sem. hrs.)
Integrating cultural theory with material
experimentations, this course investigates a variety
of contemporary practices and themes, including,
but not limited to, multimedia investigations, site-
specific installation, soundscapes, video,
performance, and phenomenologically driven
practices. The boundaries of more traditional art
experience are pushed to discover new
possibilities of collaborative and personal
expression using a variety of media in time and
space.

NB: Not offered every year.
Prerequisite(s): 15 sem. hrs. of ART, and third
or fourth year standing. (0-3 or 0-3)

ART 361 Imaging and Illustration
Design (3 sem. hrs.)
An exploration of the conception, production, and
analysis of imagery in graphic communication
design, including photos, illustrations, and graphic
marks. Imagery-based problems are investigated in
multiple design contexts and formats. Specialized
rendering techniques, digital studio practices and
iconographic style development are considered.

Cross-listed: MCOM 331.
Prerequisite(s): ART 250 or MCOM 231, and
one of the following: MCOM 111, MCOM 261,
ART 181, ART 182, or instructor’s consent. (0-3
or 0-3)

ART 362 Symbol and Typography
Design (3 sem. hrs.)
An exploration of integrated conceptual thinking
and formal experimentation with type and related
symbol systems in graphic communications.
Emphasis is placed on type as image, principles of
typesetting, hierarchy, and structure. The complex
interaction of type in relation to other graphic
elements in multiple design contexts and formats
is considered.

Cross-listed: MCOM 332.
Prerequisite(s): ART 250 or MCOM 231, and
one of the following: MCOM 111, MCOM 261,
ART 181, ART 182, or instructor’s consent. (0-3
or 0-3)
ART 363 Format and Layout Design (3
sem. hrs.)
An exploration of integrated conceptual thinking
and formal experimentation with the structural
and organizing systems at work in graphic
communications. Emphasis is given to the
development of unified graphic systems spanning
multiple design contexts and formats.

Cross-listed: MCOM 333.
Prerequisite(s): ART 250 or MCOM 231, and
one of the following: MCOM 111, MCOM 261,
ART 181, ART 182, or instructor’s consent. (0-3
or 0-3)

ART 364 Interaction Design (3 sem.
hrs.)
Introduces students to the design of interactive
digital experiences with a focus on website design,
User Experience (UX) design, and User Interface
(UI) design. Students will learn the core concepts
and principles of interaction design by working
through technical and design projects using
industry standard design software. Students leave
this course with the ability to build basic websites
and design digital experiences that follow current
interaction design standards and methodologies.

Cross-listed: MCOM 334.
Prerequisite(s): ART 250 or MCOM 231. (0-3 or
0-3)

ART 370 Professional Practices (3 sem.
hrs.)
An overview of professional practices in art and
design, with a focus on developing the practical
skills and materials necessary for sustainable and
healthy art and design careers. Students will
engage in professional writing, portfolio
development, networking, and career planning.

Prerequisite(s): Third year standing or higher.

ART 390 Cultural Theory (3 sem. hrs.)
This course introduces students to a broad range
of critical and theoretical texts that have impacted
art practices and the discipline of art history in the
twentieth century through to the current day. The
role of enlightenment aesthetics and the rise of
mass culture are explored in relation to the



                                                  144
formation of cultural modernism and how
Marxist, psychoanalytic, and poststructuralist
theories have challenged modernist conceptions.
This course investigates the implications for
Christians engaging with visual culture today;
considers the theoretical underpinnings of
postmodern theory; and cultivates the critical
thinking skills necessary to engage in current
critical debates within visual culture.

NB: Not offered every year.
Prerequisite(s): ART 327 or 328. (3-0 or 3-0)

ART 410 Drawing (3 sem. hrs.)
This studio course guides students in developing
independent, inquiry-based projects in drawing.
Students link theory with praxis; inquire into the
interrelationships between aesthetics, theory and
theology in relation to their emerging body of
work; and locate themselves within contemporary
drawing practices.

NB: Not offered every year.
Prerequisite(s): 15 sem. hrs. of ART, and third
or fourth year standing. (0-3 or 0-3)

ART 411 Senior Studio I (3 sem. hrs.)
In this intensive studio course, students are guided
through sustained research that culminates in a
senior show during ART 412. With the approval
of the Senior Studio faculty, sustained visual
cultural research and the development of a body
of work is executed. This work is self-directed and
must demonstrate an increasingly high level of
understanding of a professional work process and
the resulting production. Through research, as
well as written and spoken practice, students gain
confidence and a voice to articulate visually and
verbally, as well as to contextualize their work in
contemporary practice. Students research and
write on the integration of faith and art.

Prerequisite(s): 12 sem. hrs. of ART, and fourth
year standing. (0-3; 0-0)

ART 412 Senior Studio II (3 sem. hrs.)
In this studio course, the research and
experimentation in production done during ART
411 culminates in an intense semester of
developing a sophisticated body of work for the
Senior Show. A multidisciplinary environment is
protected, and diversity in style and medium is
emphasized.

Prerequisite(s): ART 411. (0-0; 0-3)

ART 421 Advanced Painting (3 sem.
hrs.)
This studio course emphasizes the development
of advanced artistic inquiry in painting. Students
examine strategies for structuring and developing
a visual investigation. By studying examples of
serial and thematic approaches, students see how
artists have developed bodies of sophisticated and
exploratory work.

NB: Not offered every year.
Prerequisite(s): ART 321. (0-3 or 0-3)

ART 451 Socially Engaged Art (3 sem.
hrs.)
This project based, upper level art + humanities
interdisciplinary capstone course fosters
interdisciplinary collaborative research and socially
engaged art-making practices. Also known as
relational aesthetics, socially engaged art explores
art as a state of encounter that integrates social
science practices alongside art-making practices,
co-creating with community organizations to
develop socially engaged projects.

Prerequisite(s): Upper level standing. (0-3 or 0-3)

ART 490 Special Topics in Art (3 sem.
hrs.)
Topics vary from year to year. i.e., Relational
Aesthetics (Socially Engaged Art), Curatorial
Practices, Human Centered Design, etc.

NB: Not offered every year. Course may be
repeated.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of ART or
permission of instructor. (0-3 or 0-3)

ART 491 Special Topics in Art (1 sem.
hr.)
Topics vary from year to year.

NB: Not offered every year. Course may be
repeated.




                                                  145
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of ART, or
permission of instructor. (0-3 or 0-3)

ART 492 Special Topics in Art (2 sem.
hrs.)
Topics vary from year to year.

NB: Not offered every year. Course may be
repeated.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of ART, or
permission of instructor. (0-3 or 0-3)

ART 495 Mentoring Tutorial (Honours
Project) (3 sem. hrs.)
Students plan, produce, and install a solo
exhibition, major paper, or major design project,
and are mentored through the process by a faculty
member. The mentoring can be continued
through two or more semesters.

Prerequisite(s): Permission of instructor.



Arts, Media and
Culture
SAMC 111 Critical Issues in the Arts (3
sem. hrs.)
This foundational interdisciplinary course
introduces the arts as a way of knowing, especially
through some of the complex issues in the arts,
such as: arts and interpretation, arts and
technology, arts and justice, arts and gender, and
arts and faith. Students will explore these issues
through the engagement of representative works
of both artists and scholars from varying
viewpoints and historical periods. Students will be
expected to participate fully in individual and
collaborative research projects applying both
developing skills and critical evaluation. The
format of the course includes lectures
supplemented by assigned readings for discussion
and debate. The course will be delivered by an
interdisciplinary teaching team. Students attend
weekly lectures, and participate in one of three
discussion groups.

Prerequisite(s): None.
SAMC 112 Interdisciplinary History of
Western Arts (3 sem. hrs.)
A foundational interdisciplinary introduction to
key historical developments in Western artistic
practice and concepts from ancient times to
present. Students critically engage artistic materials
(paintings, music, theatrical scripts, etc.) and
writings of the various style periods, developing
their ability to meaningfully experience, Interpret,
and articulate different approaches to the arts in
relation to the changing ideas of Western culture.
Students are encouraged to think critically,
charitably, and divergently, exploring and
evaluating how the arts were understood and
written about in different periods, and
investigating the relationship of past artistic ideas
to contemporary ideas and practices. The format
of the course includes lectures, readings,
discussion, and individual investigative
assignments and research projects. The course is
delivered by an interdisciplinary teaching team.
Students attend weekly lectures, and participate in
one of four discussion groups.
Prerequisite(s): None.

SAMC 351, 352, 353 Arts, Media and
Culture Field Placement (1, 2, 3 sem.
hrs.)
Designed for any student seeking arts leadership
skills through experience-based learning. Students
work with systems and strategies applying to self-
promotion and production, interdisciplinary and
collaborative work, and arts organizations.
Working under the direction of fine arts faculty,
students focus on utilizing resources for
development and implementation of special
projects.

NB: Pass/Fail courses.
Prerequisite(s): SAMC 110 or equivalent, and
upper level standing.

SAMC 370 Aesthetics (3 sem. hrs.)
This course doesn’t merely explore different
questions about the nature, value, and meaning of
beauty, artworks, and aesthetic experience; its
primary goal is to assist students in developing
lifestyles that embody the values, pleasures, and
risks of moving through God’s creation with deep
aesthetic attention coupled to an expansive
imagination.


                                                  146
NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: PHIL 370.
Prerequisite(s): Third or fourth year standing or
6 sem. hrs. of PHIL or instructor’s consent. (3-0
or 3-0)

SAMC 420 Arts, Media and Culture
Travel Study (3 sem. hrs.)
A three-week interdisciplinary fine arts study trip
to London and Paris, in which students critically
engage culture and the fine arts. Visits to galleries,
performances, and cultural sites accompany
lectures and readings to encourage students to
develop and deepen their biblically informed view
of the role of fine arts. While most course
activities take place in London proper, several day
trips to surrounding locations are included.

NB: Summer travel study course. This course is
limited to students wishing to take this course for
credit. No prior courses in art, theatre, or music
are necessary.
Cross-listed: IDIS 420.
Prerequisite(s): Completion.



Biology
BIOL 101 Genes and Society (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course introduces students to modern
concepts in biology and enables them to evaluate
independently the potential benefits and risks of
the biotechnological revolution and its
implications for society. The topics give an
understanding of the nature of the genetic
material, as well as major technologies currently
used in genetic engineering. Cloning and genetic
engineering of microorganisms, plants, and
animals are discussed. Students are made aware of
the impact of various genetic engineering projects
on their own lives and on society in general.
Ethical, moral, and theological issues arising from
genetic engineering are also discussed.

NB: Not to be taken for credit by biology
students. Not offered every year. See department
chair.
Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0; or 3-0)
BIOL 103 Introduction to Biology I –
Ecology and Biodiversity (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to basic concepts and
connections in the study of life, with emphasis on
ecology and adaptation of representative life
forms. The major plant and animal groups are
surveyed with emphasis on unifying elements and
diversities. This course is designed for non-
Science majors and, without BIOL 104 and 105,
does not serve as a prerequisite for upper-level
biology courses.

Corequisite: BIOL 196 Lab. (0 sem. hr.)
Prerequisite(s): None. (3-3; 0-0)

BIOL 104 Introduction to Biology II –
The Design of Life (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to the basic relationships
governing the existence of all living organisms.
The anatomy and physiology at all levels from
DNA to organ-systems are studied, looking at
energy requirements, inheritance, reproduction,
development, and adaptation of representative life
forms. This course is designed for non-Science
majors and, without BIOL 103 and 105, does not
serve as a prerequisite for upper-level biology
courses.

Corequisite: BIOL 197 Lab. (0 sem. hr.)
Prerequisite(s): None. (0-0; 3-3)

BIOL 105 Advanced Introduction to
Biology (3 sem. hrs.)
This lecture course covers certain topics in biology
that are foundational to modern biology. The
course examines the chemistry of life, DNA,
phylogeny, ecosystems, physiology, and
biotechnology. This course is designed for
students who have taken BIOL 103 and 104 and
intend to take upper level biology courses.

NB: Summer sessions only.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 103, 104.

BIOL 113 Principles of Biology I (3
sem. hrs.)
An introduction to the basic relationships
governing the existence of all living organisms,
with emphasis on ecology and adaptation of
representative life forms. Consideration is given to



                                                147
classification and surveys of the major plant and
animal groups with emphasis on unifying elements
and diversities.

Corequisite: BIOL 198 Lab. (1 sem. hr.)
Prerequisite(s): Biology 11 or 12 or equivalent.
(3-3; 0-0)

BIOL 114 Principles of Biology II (3
sem. hrs.)
An introduction to the basic relationships
governing the existence of all living organisms.
Consideration is given to the anatomy and
physiology at all levels as these relate to the energy
requirements, inheritance, reproduction,
development, and adaptation of representative life
forms.

Corequisite: BIOL 199 Lab. (1 sem. hr.)
Prerequisite(s): Biology 11 or 12 equivalent. (0-0;
3-3)

BIOL 200/300 Biotechnology Practica
II, III (2 or 3 sem. hrs.)
Biotechnology Practica II and III provide general
and advanced intern experiences in industrial
settings. BIOL 200 (2 sem. hrs.) is a requirement
for entry to co-op placements and graduation.
BIOL 300 (3 sem. hrs.) is additional intern
experience providing exposure to advanced
techniques and applications in biotechnology. The
skills taught in each practicum vary depending on
the industrial setting, but should include some of
the following techniques: mammalian tissue
culture; monoclonal antibody production
including cell fusion; hybridoma screening by
ELISA and immunoblotting; fermentation
microbiology and the operation of large-scale
fermentation systems; insect cell culture and use
of Baculovirus expression vectors to produce
recombinant proteins; downstream processing and
the recovery and purification of proteins,
carbohydrates, lipids; freezing, freeze-drying and
preservation of microorganisms, animal viruses,
cell lines and hybridomas; high throughput
screening strategies, diagnostic testing; methods in
bioinformatics; and quality control procedures.

Cross-listed: BIOT 200/300.
Prerequisite(s): BIOT 100.
BIOL 212 Biology of Vascular Plants (3
sem. hrs.)
An exploration of the role of plants as the basis
for most ecosystems, and as valuable resources for
agriculture, horticulture, forestry, biotechnology,
and other areas of human concern. The study of
vascular plants includes classification,
development, physiology, ecology, and economic
uses, with comparison of form, function, and
significance. The course involves local field trips
and laboratory studies.

NB: Students may take only one of BIOL 212 or
BIOL 312 for credit. Not offered every year. See
department chair.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 103, 104, 105; or BIOL
113, 114. (0-0; 3-3)

BIOL 214 Biology of Non-vascular
Plants (3 sem. hrs.)
An exploration of non-vascular plants and the
important niches they occupy, particularly in
aquatic or moist environments and in relation to
human health. The course covers algae, fungi,
lichens, and bryophytes including classification,
development, physiology, and ecology. Applied
aspects include productivity of freshwater and
marine systems, commercial uses, mushroom
culture, plant pathology, and environmental and
human health. Firsthand experience of the
organisms includes local field trips and laboratory
studies.

NB: Students may take only one of BIOL 214 or
BIOL 314 for credit. Not offered every year. See
department chair.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 103, 104, and 105; or
BIOL 113, 114. (0-0; 3-3)

BIOL 216 Plant Environments (3 sem.
hrs.)
The crucial role of plant ecology in shaping major
habitats, including those in British Columbia, will
be examined. A trip to Salt Spring Island will
highlight the threatened Garry oak ecosystem and
other features of interest. Field trips throughout
the course will highlight the population dynamics
and interrelationships of plant communities in
natural habitats, agricultural crops, and managed
forests. Critical assessment of planetary



                                                148
stewardship will form a common theme across
various issues in plant ecology.

Cross-listed: GENV 216.
Prerequisite(s): Instructor’s consent.

BIOL 223 Cell Biology (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of the molecules and processes that
determine cell structure and function, including
how this information is derived from the wide
range of visual and analytical tools available today.
The course describes the chemical nature of cells
and the structure and behaviour of cells in the
context of tissues.

NB: Students are advised to take CHEM 221
(Organic Chemistry) concurrently with BIOL 223.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 103, 104, and 105
(minimum Grade C required); or BIOL 113 and
BIOL 114 (minimum Grade C required); CHEM
103 or 111, and CHEM 104 or 112 (minimum
Grade C required). (3-3; 0-0)

BIOL 226 Introduction to Evolutionary
Theory (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to the basic concepts of evolution
as an organizing theory in biology. Topics covered
include comparative genomics, sources or
variation, natural selection, genetic drift,
adaptation, sexual selection, kin selection,
speciation and phylogenetics.

Prerequisite(s): BIOL 103, 104 and 105; or
BIOL 113 and 114.

BIOL 233 Microbiology for Nurses (3
sem. hrs.)
A study of pathogenic microorganisms and the
control of infectious diseases. Topics include (i)
the biology of bacteria, viruses, fungi, protozoa,
and helminths; (ii) immunity, immunology, and
immunization; (iii) sterilization, disinfection,
chemotherapeutic agents; and (iv) epidemiology
and public health microbiology. This course is
only open to nursing students.

NB: Students may only take one of BIOL 233 or
BIOL 333 for credit.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 241 and 242.
BIOL 241 Human Anatomy and
Physiology I (3 sem. hrs.)
An introductory course in human anatomy and
physiology focusing on the structure and function
of the cellular, histological, integumentary,
skeleton, muscular, cardiovascular, respiratory and
metabolic systems. Special attention will be given
to the interaction of these systems in maintenance
of homeostasis and adaptations during
performance and disease conditions.

Prerequisite(s): None. (3-3; 0-0)

BIOL 242 Human Anatomy and
Physiology II (3 sem. hrs.)
An introductory course in human anatomy and
physiology focusing on the structure and function
of the nervous, digestive, renal, endocrine, and
reproductive systems in addition to immunity and
acid-base balance. Special attention will be given
to the interaction of these systems in maintenance
of homeostasis and adaptations.

Prerequisite(s): BIOL 241 or Instructor’s
consent. (0-0; 3-3)

BIOL 262 Marine Biology (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of the life history and distribution of
marine organisms in several major habitat types,
including soft sediment and rocky substrate
communities. Emphasis is on field and laboratory
work in a survey of common local marine plants
and animals and their relationships. Includes field
work in the Lower Mainland, Gulf Islands, and/or
Vancouver Island.

NB: Summer sessions only. Not offered every
year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: GENV 262.
Prerequisite(s): Instructor’s consent.

BIOL 281 General Ecology (3 sem.
hrs.)
A study of the structure and dynamics of
ecosystems. Consideration of plant and animal
populations in relation to physical, chemical, and
biological factors affecting their interaction and
productivity. Considerable laboratory time is
devoted to the study of local ecosystems, field
sampling techniques, and field trips to ecological
research areas.


                                                149
Cross-listed: GENV 281.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 103, 104, and 105; or
BIOL 113 and 114; or equivalent. (0-0; 3-3)

BIOL 290 Introduction to
Biotechnology (3 sem. hrs.)
This course reviews the role of modern
biotechnology in plant, animal, and marine
biology, microbiology, agriculture, the
pharmaceutical industry, and medicine. The course
focuses on underlying technologies in
biotechnology, how these technologies are
implemented, together with public concerns and
government guidelines and legislation.

Cross-listed: BIOT 290.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 103, 104, and 105 or
BIOL 113 and 114.

BIOL 308 Vertebrate Zoology (3 sem.
hrs.)
A comparative study of the vertebrate classes with
special emphasis on the anatomy and physiology
of representative forms. The significance of
advances in the complexity of chordates is
considered, as well as the impact of human
activities on vertebrate population dynamics.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 103, 104, and 105; or
BIOL 113 and 114. (3-3; 0-0)

BIOL 312 Advanced Biology of
Vascular Plants (3 sem. hrs.)
An exploration of the role of plants as the basis
for most ecosystems, and as valuable resources for
agriculture, horticulture, forestry, biotechnology,
and other areas of human concern. The study of
vascular plants includes classification,
development, physiology, ecology, and economic
uses, with comparison of form, function, and
significance. The course involves local field trips
and laboratory studies. Recent discoveries in plant
biology are highlighted through the completion of
a literature review.

NB: Students may only take one of BIOL 212 or
BIOL 312 for credit. Not offered every year. See
department chair.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 103, 104, and 105; or
BIOL 113, 114. (0-0; 3-3)
BIOL 314 Advanced Biology of Non-
Vascular Plants (3 sem. hrs.)
An exploration of non-vascular plants and the
important niches they occupy, particularly in
aquatic or moist environments and in relation to
human health. The course covers algae, fungi,
lichens, and bryophytes including classification,
development, physiology, and ecology. Applied
aspects include productivity of freshwater and
marine systems, commercial uses, mushroom
culture, plant pathology and environmental and
human health. Firsthand experience of the
organisms includes local field trips and laboratory
studies. Recent discoveries in plant biology are
highlighted through the completion of a literature
review.

NB: Students may only take one of BIOL 214 or
BIOL 314 for credit. Not offered every year. See
department chair.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 103, 104, and 105; or
BIOL 113, 114. (0-0; 3-3)

BIOL 315 Plant Physiology (3 sem.
hrs.)
An inventory of basic plant mechanisms and plant
development. Mechanisms include assimilation,
transport, and utilization of water and mineral
nutrients and the utilization and distribution of
photo assimilates. Plant development includes cell
division, tissue culture, meristems, and the role of
hormones in plant morphogenesis. Experimental
approaches and biotechnology applications of
plant molecular biology are stressed.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 103, 104, and 105; or
BIOL 113, 114; BIOL 223 recommended. (3-3; 0-
0)

BIOL 316 Plant Ecology (3 sem. hrs.)
The crucial role of plant ecology in shaping major
habitats, including those in British Columbia, will
be examined. A trip to Salt Spring Island will
highlight the threatened Garry oak ecosystem and
other features of interest. Field trips throughout
the course will highlight the population dynamics
and interrelationships of plant communities in
natural habitats, agricultural crops, and managed
forests. Critical assessment of planetary



                                                150
stewardship will form a common theme across
various issues in plant ecology.

NB: Summer sessions only. Includes fieldwork in
the Gulf Islands. Not offered every year. See
department chair.
Cross-listed: GENV 316.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 103, 104, and 105; or
BIOL 113, 114.

BIOL 318 Tropical Botany (3 sem.
hrs.)
As an exploration of the botanical riches of the
tropics - focusing on the plant life of Hawaii - this
course traces fundamentals of plant taxonomy,
physiology, and ecology in relation to complexities
of existence on the most isolated island chain in
the world. Issues related to indigenous vegetation,
including effects of introduced animals and plants,
agriculture, and ethnobotany, are discussed. The
course involves one week of lectures at Trinity
Western and two weeks of lectures and fieldwork
in Hawaii.

NB: Summer sessions only. Not offered every
year.
Cross-listed: GENV 318.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 103, 104, and 105; or
BIOL 113, 114 and instructor's consent. BIOL
216 or 312 or 314 or 316 strongly recommended.

BIOL 326 Evolutionary Theory (3 sem.
hrs.)
An in-depth survey of evolution as an organizing
theory in biology, with emphasis on the primary
scientific literature. Topics covered include
comparative genomics, sources of variation,
natural selection, genetic drift, adaptation, sexual
selection, kin selection, speciation and
phylogenetics.

NB: Students may only take one, BIOL 226 or
BIOL 326 for credit.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 371 and at least one of
BIOL 372 or 386.

BIOL 333 Introduction to Medical
Microbiology (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of pathogenic microorganisms and the
control of infectious diseases. Topics include: (i)
the biology of bacteria, viruses, fungi, protozoa,
and helminths; (ii) infectious diseases of temperate
and tropical climates; (iii) immunity, immunology,
and immunization; (iv) sterilization, disinfection,
chemotherapeutic agents; and (v) epidemiology
and public health microbiology.

NB: Students may only take one of BIOL 233 or
BIOL 333 for credit.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 103, 104, and 105; or
BIOL 113 and 114; or BIOL 241 and 242. (3-3; 0-
0)

BIOL 334 Basic and Applied
Microbiology (3 sem. hrs.)
An advanced study of topics in basic and applied
microbiology. Topics include: (i) the structure,
ultrastructure, and biochemical structure of
prokaryotes, eukaryotes, and viruses; (ii) microbial
biochemistry and physiology; (iii) microbial
taxonomy and phylogeny; (iv) microbial ecology
and agricultural microbiology; and (v) industrial
microbiology and biotechnology.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 103, 104, and 105; or
BIOL 113 and 114. (0-0; 3-3)

BIOL 336 Immunology (3 sem. hrs.)
A lecture course covering current topics in
immunology, including: the cellular basis of
immunity, the molecular genetics of antibody
diversity, the major histocompatibility complex,
antigen recognition, lymphocyte development, the
complement system, hypersensitivity reactions,
and immunodeficiency diseases. The course
provides an integrated view of the immune system
and the immunologic response to disease.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 223; BIOL 333
recommended. (3-3; 3-0)

BIOL 340 Developmental Biology (3
sem. hrs.)
This course studies animal development and its
underlying causal principles including introductory
reproductive biology, embryology, and
developmental genetics.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.



                                                151
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 103, 104, and 105; or
BIOL 113 and 114; BIOL 223. (3-3; 0-0)

BIOL 343 Human Histology (3 sem.
hrs.)
A study of the normal microscopic anatomy of the
various tissues and organs of the body with an
emphasis on the relationship between structure
and function. Special attention is given to the field
of human histology with some discussion of the
similarities and differences in animals. The
laboratory component of the course involves the
observation and discussion of representative tissue
sections and provides a basic understanding of
normal versus abnormal morphology.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 103, 104, and 105; or
BIOL 113 and 114; BIOL 223 recommended. (3-
3; 0-0)

BIOL 344 Environmental Physiology
(3 sem. hrs.)
A survey of physiological adaptations of animals
to different environments including
environmental stress. These adaptations are
examined at several levels of organization, from
the molecular and biochemical to the function of
organ systems and behaviour. Includes in-depth
examination of both vertebrate and invertebrate
examples.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 103, 104, and 105; or
BIOL 113 and 114. (0-0; 3-3)

BIOL 345 Vertebrate Physiology (3
sem. hrs.)
A course on the physiology of the various organ
systems of humans and higher vertebrates. The
course provides an integrated view of the
organization and functioning of the different
organ systems of the body and their role in
maintaining homeostasis.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 103, 104, and 105; or
BIOL 113 and 114; BIOL 223 recommended. (3-
3; 0-0)
BIOL 346 Advanced Human
Physiology (3 sem. hrs.)
Providing a deeper insight into mechanisms
underlying a broad range of physiological
phenomena, this course emphasizes the
integration of the homeostatic mechanisms
involving the various organ systems.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 103, 104, and 105; or
BIOL 113 and 114; BIOL 345; or instructor’s
consent. (0-0; 3-3)

BIOL 360 Invertebrate Zoology (3
sem. hrs.)
A survey of the invertebrate phyla with particular
reference to their phylogenetic relationships.
Laboratories and field trips provide hands-on
experience studying both terrestrial and marine
invertebrates of the Pacific coastal region.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 103, 104, and 105; or
BIOL 113 and 114. (3-3; 0-0)

BIOL 362 Marine Ecology (3 sem.
hrs.)
A study of the ecological relationships of marine
life in several major habitat types. Emphasis is on
productivity, food webs, nutrient cycling, and
community ecology. Ecosystem parameters are
investigated through field and laboratory studies.
Part of coursework takes place in the Lower
Mainland, Gulf Islands, and/or Vancouver Island.

NB: Summer sessions only. Not offered every
year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: GENV 362.
Prerequisite(s): Advanced standing in biology
and instructor’s consent. BIOL 308 and/or 360
strongly recommended.

BIOL 364 Coral Reef Ecology (3 sem.
hrs.)
A field course focusing on the systematics and
ecology of tropical coral reef organisms. Plants,
animals, and physical factors of a fringing coral
reef are examined through snorkeling excursions
and laboratory studies. One species is chosen for a




                                               152
detailed research project. Includes field course
work in Hawaii.

NB: Summer sessions only. Not offered every
year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: GENV 364.
Prerequisite(s): Advanced standing in biology
and instructor’s consent.
Recommended: BIOL 262, 308, 360, 382.

BIOL 371 Introduction to Genetics (3
sem. hrs.)
An introduction to the study of heredity.
Emphasizes classic genetics of populations and
individuals in viruses, bacteria, plants, and animals.

Prerequisite(s): BIOL 103, 104, and 105; or
BIOL 113 and 114. (3-4; 0-0)

BIOL 372 Molecular Genetics (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course considers modern developments and
techniques in genetics, especially the basic and
applied aspects of recombinant DNA technology.

Cross-listed: CHEM 372.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 103, 104, and 105 or
BIOL 113 and 114; BIOL 223 (a minimum Grade
of C required); and one of CHEM 103 or 111; and
CHEM 104 or 112; CHEM 221, 222, and BIOL
371 recommended. (0-0; 3-3)

BIOL 384 Principles of Biochemistry
(3 sem. hrs.)
This course studies chemical structure, function,
and metabolism of carbohydrates, lipids, proteins,
and nucleic acids. This class is continued as BIOL
386.

Cross-listed: CHEM 384.
Prerequisite: CHEM 221, 222.
Recommended: BIOL 103, 104, and 105; or
BIOL 113 and 114; BIOL 223. (3-3; 0-0)

BIOL 386 Biosynthesis (3 sem. hrs.)
This course explores the modern understanding of
the biochemical transfer of genetic information:
DNA structure and synthesis, transcription and
translation. This course also examines the
regulatory mechanisms of gene control in
prokaryotes and eukaryotes, as well as protein
structure and function. The central theme of the
course is to illustrate the significance of nucleic
acid and protein biochemistry in modern biology.

Cross-listed: CHEM 386.
Prerequisites: CHEM 221, 222.
Recommended: BIOL 103, 104 and 105; or
BIOL 113, 114; 223; 384. (0-0; 3-0)

BIOL 390 Biology and Christian
Theology (3 sem. hrs.)
This course is designed to untangle some of the
actual or perceived dissonance between issues of
biological science and Christian theology. Six
major topics are addressed: (1) models, analogies,
and metaphors in science and Christian theology;
(2) scientific and religious investigations of the
biosphere; (3) defining human nature; (4) defining
non-human nature; (5) caring for the earth; and (6)
the biomedical revolution. The common threads
among these topics are the tension between
Christian faith and the findings of basic and
applied biology (biotechnology), and the call to
action required in a faith-based view of creation.
As well as speaking from their own disciplines and
background, the course instructors take part in
panel discussions at the end of each of the six
units to foster discussion and dialogue on the
issues. Student participation is encouraged by
group projects that develop and present a position
paper on an area that engenders dissonance
between scientific and religious worldview
perspectives.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: BIOT 390.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 103, 104, and 105 or
BIOL 113 and 114; Third year standing. (3-0 3-0)

BIOL 400 Directed Studies in Biology
(3 sem. hrs.)
Students are required to produce an outline of the
topic to be studied in consultation with the
instructor. A course of reading and/or
experimentation is pursued according to the
approved outline. Assessment may be via
examination and/or a final written report.

NB: This course, with the appropriate choice of
topics, can be used as preparation for the senior
thesis (BIOL 410).


                                                153
Prerequisite(s): Advanced standing in biology or
instructor’s consent.

BIOL 409 Thesis Preparation (1 sem.
hr.)
Students will be required to choose a topic for
their senior thesis (BIOL 409-410/GENV 409-
410) in consultation with an instructor. Selected
readings and references pertinent to the topic will
be assigned. A final written report will be
presented consisting of a detailed thesis proposal
and a review of the literature.

Cross-listed: BIOT 409.
Prerequisite(s): Advanced standing in biology or
instructor’s consent. (1-1; 0-0)

BIOL 410 Senior Thesis (2 sem. hrs.)
Research in a chosen area of biology or
environmental studies with a final written report.
Presentation of research findings will also be made
by the student in a poster session.

Cross-listed: BIOT 410.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 409. A related directed
study in preparation, or instructor’s consent. (0-0;
1-2)

BIOL 411 Senior Thesis (3 sem. hrs.)
In this course, students research a chosen area of
biology and provide a final written report.
Students present research findings in a seminar.
This course option allows students with larger
projects to gain extra credit.

Prerequisite(s): BIOL 409, a related directed
study in preparation, or instructor’s consent. (0-0;
1-3)

BIOL 423 Advanced Cell and
Molecular Biology (3 sem. hrs.)
A laboratory course emphasizing advanced
techniques in cell biology, molecular biology, and
developmental genetics. Topics include functional
genomics, mobile genetic elements, somatic clonal
analysis, molecular cloning, and epifluorescence/
confocal microscopy. This course is designed for
students who are interested in a career in the life
sciences and who wish to familiarize themselves
with a number of applied laboratory techniques.
NB: BIOL 423 is an appropriate addition to or
substitution for BIOL 409, 410.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 221, 222; BIOL 223 (a
minimum grade of C), and at least one of BIOL
384 or 372. Recommended BIOL 371. (0-4; 0-4)

BIOL 433 The Human Microbiome (3
sem. hrs.)
This course will focus on the human microbiome
and the complex symbiotic relationships,
exploring the impacts of those host-microbe
interactions on physical and mental health. The
course will also examine the current research tools
and emerging applications within the field.

Prerequisite(s): BIOL 223, and one of BIOL 333
or BIOL 334.

BIOL 438 Virology (3 sem. hrs.)
This course provides a basic understanding of
some of the current topics in modern virology
including the structure, classification, and
replication of viruses, virus-cell interactions,
diagnostic and research applications in virology,
and the molecular biology of several important
viruses causing disease in humans and animals.
Special emphasis is given to viral pathogenesis
making this course suitable for those pursuing
careers in medicine or related fields.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 223; 333; and BIOL 372
or 386. (3-0; 3-0)

BIOL 440 Developmental
Neurobiology (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of the development of the nervous system
in humans and invertebrate and vertebrate model
organisms. Topics covered include neurogenesis,
the development and cell biology of neurons and
glia, developmental genetics, and nervous system
defects arising from abnormal development.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 371; and BIOL 372 or
BIOL 386. (3-3; 3-3)

BIOL 450 Neuroscience (3 sem. hrs.)
An advanced course in neuroscience which
examines current research on the cellular
organization of the brain as well as the role of


                                                   154
physiological processes in human thought,
emotions, and behaviour. Interactions between
physiological and psychological processes are
emphasized. Laboratory experiments focus on the
basics of recording bioelectric potentials in
invertebrates and humans.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 354; and either BIOL 113,
114 or PSYC 105, 106, and 201. (0-0; 3-3)

BIOL 470 Introduction to
Bioinformatics (3 sem. hrs.)
An overview of the interdisciplinary science of
genomics, proteomics, and bioinformatics which
applies the tools of information technology
(computer hardware and software) to analyze
biological data such as gene or protein sequences.
This course examines the theory of bioinformatics
as well as its practical application to biological
problems using approaches such as BLAST
searches, phylogenetics, and protein structure
function analysis.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: BIOT 470 or CMPT 470.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 223; BIOL 372, and either
3 sem. hrs. of CMPT or MATH 102. (0-0; 3-3)

BIOL 474 Genetics and Cell Biology of
Neoplasia (3 sem. hrs.)
A lecture course reviewing a wide range of topics
related to cancer including the biology and
immunology of tumor cells, chemical and viral
carcinogenesis, oncogenes, genetic predisposition
to cancer, and treatment strategies.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 223, and one of BIOL
340, 372, or 386. (0-0; 3-0)

BIOL 475 Protein Structure and
Function (3 sem. Hrs.)
An in-depth study on protein biochemistry, with a
focus on the relationship between protein
structure and its corresponding function on a
molecular and organismal scale. This course will
also cover recent developments in protein
research, including the use of proteomics in
systems biology and medicine, particularly drug
development.
NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: CHEM 475.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 384 and 386, or CHEM
384 and 386 (minimum of Grade C required);
Recommended BIOL 103, 104, and 105 or BIOL
113, 114, and BIOL 223.

BIOL 484 Conservation Biology (3
sem. hrs.)
An exploration of various practical applications of
biology in environmental management,
monitoring, and remediation. Topics include many
important areas of concern such as wildlife
management, fisheries, forestry, agriculture, water
and air pollution, and protection of endangered
ecosystems. Various biological approaches to
these are considered, such as population
modelling, ecophysiology, microbiology
techniques, biomonitoring, ecosystem health, and
biodiversity inventories. The implications of
environmental ethics and the role of Christian
environmental stewardship are discussed.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: GENV 484.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 281 (may be taken
concurrently). (0-0; 3-3)

BIOL 490 Advanced Biotechnology (3
sem. hrs.)
This capstone course in biotechnology considers
the theoretical and practical aspects of
implementing biotechnology, paying particular
attention to current issues including: (1)
technology transfer and commercialization; (2)
patent protection in biotechnology; (3) Good
Laboratory Practices (GLP); (4) Good
Manufacturing Practices (Food and Drug
Regulations, 2002 edition); (5) Good Clinical
Practices (GCP); (6) Research Ethics Board
guidelines; (7) validation studies; (8) downstream
processing and the recovery of purified products;
(9) novel developments in methodology. The
course includes a seminar series by industry and
regulatory experts and site visits to local
biotechnology companies to assess how they have
implemented and overcome obstacles to
production and quality control.

Cross-listed: BIOT 490.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 290. (0-0; 3-3)


                                               155
Biotechnology
BIOT 100 Biotechnology Practicum I
(1 sem. hr.)
This hands-on course is part of an intern program
in the Biology Department at TWU designed to
provide instruction in general laboratory
procedures and laboratory safety beyond that
required during regular undergraduate
laboratories. Performed tasks are evaluated and
occur in the areas of animal husbandry, general
laboratory maintenance, cell culture,
histochemistry, light microscopy, and protein
chemistry (i.e., western blotting, SDS-PAGE).
Students will also acquire general instruction in
Good Laboratory Practice (GLP) and Good
Animal Practice (GAP).

Prerequisites/Co-requisites: BIOL
103/104/105 or BIOL 113/114. (0-0, 0-1)

BIOT 200/300/400 Biotechnology
Practica II, III, IV (2 or 3 sem. hrs.)
Biotechnology Practica II–IV provide general and
advanced intern experiences in industrial settings.
BIOT 200 (2 sem. hrs.) is a requirement for entry
to co-op placements and graduation. BIOT 300
and 400 (3 sem. hrs. each) are additional intern
experiences providing exposure to advanced
techniques and applications in biotechnology. The
skills taught in each practicum vary depending on
the industrial setting, but should include some of
the following techniques: mammalian tissue
culture; monoclonal antibody production
including cell fusion; hybridoma screening by
ELISA and immunoblotting; fermentation
microbiology and the operation of large-scale
fermentation systems; insect cell culture and use
of Baculovirus expression vectors to produce
recombinant proteins; downstream processing and
the recovery and purification of proteins,
carbohydrates, lipids; freezing, freeze-drying and
preservation of microorganisms, animal viruses,
cell lines and hybridomas; high throughput
screening strategies, diagnostic testing; methods in
bioinformatics; and quality control procedures.

Cross-listed: BIOL 200/300.
Prerequisite(s): BIOT 100.
BIOT 290 Introduction to
Biotechnology (3 sem. hrs.)
This course reviews the role of modern
biotechnology in plant, animal, and marine
biology, microbiology, agriculture, the
pharmaceutical industry, and medicine. The course
focuses on underlying technologies in
biotechnology, how these technologies are
implemented, together with public concerns and
government guidelines and legislation.

Cross-listed: BIOL 290.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 103, 104, and 105 or
BIOL 113, 114. (3-0 or 3-0)

BIOT 390 Biotechnology and Christian
Theology (3 sem. hrs.)
This course is designed to untangle some of the
actual or perceived dissonance between issues of
biological science and Christian theology. Six
major topics are addressed: (1) models, analogies
and metaphors in science and Christian theology;
(2) scientific and religious investigations of the
biosphere; (3) defining human nature; (4) defining
non-human nature; (5) caring for the earth; and (6)
the biomedical revolution. The common threads
among these topics are the tension between
Christian faith and the findings of basic and
applied biology (biotechnology), and the call to
action required in a faith-based view of creation.
As well as speaking from their own disciplines and
background, the course instructors take part in
panel discussions at the end of each of the six
units to foster discussion and dialogue on the
issues. Student participation is further encouraged
by group projects in which the group must
develop and dissonance between scientific and
religious worldview perspectives.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: BIOL 390.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 103, 104, and 105 or
BIOL 113, 114; third year standing. (3-0 or 3-0)

BIOT 409 Thesis Preparation (1 sem.
hr.)
Students will be required to choose a topic for
their senior thesis (BIOL 409-410/GENV 409-
410) in consultation with an instructor. Selected
readings and references pertinent to the topic will
be assigned. A final written report will be


                                                156
presented consisting of a detailed thesis proposal
and a review of the literature.

Cross-listed: BIOL 409.
Prerequisite(s): Advanced standing in
biotechnology. (1-1; 0-0)

BIOT 410 Senior Thesis (2 sem. hrs.)
Research in a chosen area of biology or
environmental studies with a final written report.
Presentation of research findings will also be made
by the student in a poster session.

Cross-listed: BIOL 410.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 409, a related directed
study in preparation, or instructor’s consent. (0-0;
1-2)

BIOT 470 Introduction to
Bioinformatics (3 sem. hrs.)
An overview of the interdisciplinary science of
genomics, proteomics, and bioinformatics which
applies the tools of information technology
(computer hardware and software) to analyze
biological data such as gene or protein sequences.
This course examines the theory of bioinformatics
as well as its practical application to biological
problems using approaches such as BLAST
searches, phylogenetics, and protein structure
function analysis.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair
Cross-listed: BIOL 470.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 223; BIOL 372; and either
3 sem. hrs. of CMPT or MATH 102. (0-0; 3-3-0)

BIOT 490 Advanced Biotechnology (3
sem. hrs.)
This capstone course in biotechnology considers
the theoretical and practical aspects of
implementing biotechnology, paying particular
attention to current issues including: (1)
technology transfer and commercialization; (2)
patent protection in biotechnology; (3) Good
Laboratory Practices (GLP); (4) Good
Manufacturing Practices (Food and Drug
Regulations, 2002 edition); (5) Good Clinical
Practices (GCP); (6) Research Ethics Board
guidelines; (7) validation studies; (8) downstream
processing and the recovery of purified products;
(9) novel developments in methodology. The
course includes a seminar series by industry and
regulatory experts and site visits to local
biotechnology companies to assess how they have
implemented and overcome obstacles to
production and quality control.

Cross-listed: BIOL 490.
Prerequisite(s): BIOT 290. (0-0; 3-3)



Business
BUSI 110 Business in the Global
Market (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to global business practices. A
survey of governmental and corporate practices of
major economic systems—Japan, Europe, Pacific
Rim, Rhine countries, etc. Different cultural
meanings of concepts such as globalization, world
class, nimble organizations, empowerment, and
teams are explored. The class provides the
students with experiential as well as classroom
learning to provide a better grasp of the
differences in cultures and the adaptation of
business concepts.

NB: Offered when available in summer, with
overseas travel component. Open to Business and
nonbusiness majors.
Cross-listed: ECON 110.
Prerequisite(s): Instructor’s consent.

BUSI 111 Introduction to Business and
Management (3 sem. hrs.)
In this course, modern business is studied in its
various aspects: economic and social setting,
business classifications and financial requirements,
business structure and functional areas, basic
concepts and techniques, practices and
responsibilities, and career opportunities in
business.

Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0; 3-0)

BUSI 121 Financial Accounting (3 sem.
hrs.)
Accounting fundamentals, techniques, principles,
and concepts. Other topics include the complete
accounting cycle, including adjusting and closing
entries, the preparation and interpretation of


                                                157
simple financial statements, inventory treatments,
capital assets, and partnership accounting.
Students are also required to complete a computer
based accounting lab.

Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0; 3-0)

BUSI 176 Introduction to Business
Research and Decision Making (3 sem.
hrs.)
Business research allows managers to make
effective decisions in today’s organizations. This
class will assist students in understanding the
research questions to ask in business and will
prepare them to analyze and present the data they
gather. Students will gain extensive skills in the use
of spreadsheets and in spreadsheet modeling – an
indispensable tool in the business world.

Cross-listed: ECON 176.
Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0; 3-0)

BUSI 222 Financial and Managerial
Accounting (3 sem. hrs.)
The first half of the course focuses on financial
accounting with topics such as shareholder equity,
investments, the cash flow statement, the
comprehensive income statement, and financial
analysis. Students learn to analyze and extract key
information from corporate financial statements.
The second half of the course focuses on
managerial accounting covering topics such as
cost-volume-profit analysis and budgeting.

Prerequisite(s): BUSI 121. (3-0; 3-0)

BUSI 231 Principles of Marketing (3
sem. hrs.)
This course explores basic considerations affecting
the domestic and international marketing of goods
and services. Topics include: the nature of
marketing activities and marketing institutions, the
function and responsibility of an effective
marketing system, as well as its role in the
economy, the manner in which various forces
influence the marketing process, and the analysis
of marketing concepts, policies, and practices.

Prerequisite(s): BUSI 111 and second year
standing or instructor’s consent. (3-0; 3-0)
BUSI 241 Personal Financial Planning
(3 sem. hrs.)
Personal financial planning is key to the successful
accomplishment of one’s life goals. Topics in this
course include foundations in financial planning,
asset management, debt management, insurance
analysis, investment management, retirement
planning, and estate planning.

NB: Open to business and nonbusiness students.
Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0; 0-0)

BUSI 245 Foundations of Business
Law in Canada (3 sem. hrs.)
A general overview of business law with specific
focus on the law of contracts. Attention is given
to offer and acceptance, consideration,
assignment, discharge, breach, and remedies
available at law.

Prerequisite(s): Second year standing. (3-0; 3-0)

BUSI 275 Business Statistics (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course considers statistical tools and
knowledge necessary for success in business
endeavours. Topics include: descriptive statistics,
probability (with discrete and continuous
distributions), hypothesis testing, regression, and
ANOVA. Students learn theory behind the
methods, and primarily use spreadsheets as tools
for solving advanced problems.

Cross-listed: ECON 275.
Prerequisite(s): BUSI 176 or instructor’s
consent. (3-0; 3-0)

BUSI 280 Organizational Behaviour (3
sem. hrs.)
This course focuses on the nature of individuals
and behaviour in organizations. The emphasis of
the course is on building a set of conceptual and
pragmatic skills useful in understanding and
managing interactions among individuals and
groups within organizations. By providing a
knowledgebase of organizational and managerial
concepts, and by using cases, videos, exercises,
and personal inventories, this course develops a
student’s analytical, diagnostic, and interpersonal
skills.



                                                 158
Prerequisite(s): BUSI 111 and second year
standing. (3-0; 3-0)

BUSI 301 Managerial Economics (3
sem. hrs.)
The study of the main principles and techniques
of price theory and its practical applications.
Major topics include: price, production, and
distribution theories, the theory of the firm, risk
and uncertainty, game theory, and transaction
costs. New developments and/or approaches to
microeconomic analysis.

Cross-listed: ECON 301.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 202. (3-0; 3-0)

BUSI 302 Intermediate
Macroeconomics for Managerial
Decision-Making (3 sem. hrs.)
This course looks at the main concepts and
methods usually used by economists to explain
macroeconomic variables. Topics include:
inflation, unemployment, consumption,
investment, foreign trade, monetary and fiscal
policies, and economic growth. Classical and
Keynesian macroeconomic models are studied and
compared in terms of economic statics and
dynamics.

NB: May not be offered every year.
Cross-listed: ECON 302.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 202. (0-0; 3-0)

BUSI 304 Financial Markets and
Institutions (3 sem. hrs.)
The study of the role of money, monetary policy,
and financial institutions in the Canadian and U.S.
economies. Major topics include: interest rates,
decision makers, financial asset prices, risk
management, banking and financial institutions,
and central banks and monetary policy.

Cross-listed: ECON 304.
Prerequisite(s): BUSI 342. (3-0 or 3-0)

BUSI 311 Global Issues in Business (3
sem. hrs.)
The focus of this course is on understanding the
institutions (e.g., political, economic, and cultural)
and the resources (e.g., natural, human,
technology, and innovation) that are present
within home and host countries that influence the
decision making of business owners and managers
as they consider going global with their product or
service. Discussions centre around understanding
culture, ethics, and global sustainability that relate
to being a responsible and ethical global citizen.

NB: May not be offered every year.
Cross-listed: ECON 311.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 202. (3-0; 3-0)

BUSI 317 Investment Theory (3 sem.
hrs.)
A study of financial markets and the various
instruments traded on those markets, with
consideration to how these instruments are priced.
Other topics explored include portfolio theory,
market efficiency, equilibrium, asset analysis, asset
allocation, and portfolio management.

Cross-listed: ECON 317.
Prerequisite(s): BUSI 342. (3-0 or 3-0)

BUSI 318 Applied Investments (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course encompasses the Canadian Securities
course (CSC) and will explore investment topics
relevant to an investment advisor in the Canadian
securities industry. Topics considered in this
course include: capital markets and their
regulation, investment products, portfolio
management, and managed accounts.

NB: Please note that there is an additional,
external fee of approximately $1,000 payable to
the Canadian Securities Institute for students
enrolling in this course.

Prerequisite(s): BUSI 342. (0-0; 3-0)

BUSI 321 Intermediate Accounting I (3
sem. hrs.)
This course explores the role and objectives of
financial reporting, the challenges facing standard
setting, and a review of the accounting process.
Other topics include income measurement and
issues related to economic resources such as cash,
receivables, inventories, and operational assets.




                                                  159
Prerequisite(s): BUSI 121, 222, with at least a 2.5
GPA. (3-0; 0-0)

BUSI 322 Intermediate Accounting II
(3 sem. hrs.)
Accounting principles related to capital assets and
amortization. Topics include investments,
contingent liabilities and disclosure, bonds and
long term liabilities, capital and operating leases,
income tax liabilities, pension and benefits
liabilities, shareholder’s equity, and earnings per
share calculations.

Prerequisite(s): BUSI 321. (0-0; 3-0)

BUSI 323 Management Accounting I
(3 sem. hrs.)
Accounting concepts used by management to plan
and control their operations. Topics include:
analysis of accounting information for use in
decision-making, cost-volume-profit relationships,
the techniques for costing a firm’s products and
services, the managerial uses of these costs, and
the development of budgets.

Prerequisite(s): BUSI 222. (3-0; 0-0)

BUSI 324 Management Accounting II
(3 sem. hrs.)
A study of the design, preparation, and use of
flexible budgets and variances, the cost
information required for pricing and product
evaluation, management control systems and
performance measures, and how to assist in the
strategic planning of the firm.

Prerequisite(s): BUSI 323. (0-0; 3-0)

BUSI 334 Sales Management (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course looks at case studies, textual material
relating to various aspects of sales management
(such as marketing strategy, planning the sales
function, and controlling of the sales effort), sales
analysis, and evaluation management of the sales
force and personal selling.

Prerequisite(s): BUSI 231. (3-0 or 3-0)
BUSI 335 Consumer Behaviour (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course explores the ways human beings think
about buying the products and services they need,
want, or desire in order to help the producers of
products and services better design and deliver
them. This understanding of what we term
“consumer behavior” is a fundamental key to all
marketing decisions and programs as we seek to
explore the psychology of the entire buying
process from awareness of need to post-purchase
evaluation. Students are exposed to numerous
theories from psychology, sociology, economics,
education, and marketing to explain why and how
consumers buy the products and services they do.

Prerequisite(s): BUSI 280; ECON 201. (3-0 or
3-0)

BUSI 338 International Marketing
Management (3 sem. hrs.)
Designed to equip students for marketing in a
global environment, this course will cover the
scope and challenges of international marketing,
the dynamics of international trade, and the
cultural, political, legal, and business systems of
global markets. Students will develop the ability to
recognize global market opportunities; they will
also learn to develop global marketing strategies.

Prerequisite(s): BUSI 231. (3-0 or 3-0)

BUSI 342 Management Finance (3
sem. hrs.)
This course will explore the principles of
successful financial management and will target
various aspects of managing an organization
financially. The focus of the course is on
application of financial concepts in three key areas
of financial management: financing a business,
making capital investment decisions, and
managing the financial aspects of an organization's
operations in a way that adds economic value. The
course will be taught from a Christian worldview
and will emphasize the importance of man's
responsibility/stewardship of what she/he is
responsible for, and to whom she/he is ultimately
accountable.

Prerequisite(s): BUSI 176, 222. (3-0; 3-0)



                                                160
BUSI 346 Law for the Business
Manager (3 sem. hrs.)
This course follows up on BUSI 245 and provides
students with the knowledge and skills to manage
a number of business areas that have potential
legal risk including sale of goods, agency,
bailment, insurance and guarantees, negotiable
instruments, employment and human rights,
intellectual property, real property, mortgages,
partnerships, the nature and operations of
corporations, credit transactions, and government
regulation of business.

Prerequisite(s): BUSI 245. (3-0; 3-0)

BUSI 351 Labour and Employee
Relations (3 sem. hrs.)
The students will learn about promoting a
collaborative work environment between the
employer, the union (where it exists), employees,
and other representative groups. An emphasis will
be on interpreting employment and labour
legislation, including collective agreements, and
creating policies consistent with legal requirements
and organizational values, with a focus on treating
employees in a fair and consistent manner.

Prerequisite(s): BUSI 280; third year standing.
(0-0; 3-0)

BUSI 352 Managing the Human
Resource (3 sem. hrs.)
A practical study on how organizations obtain,
maintain, and retain their human resources that
enable them to achieve their objectives. Topics
include: human resource planning, recruitment,
selection, performance management and training
and development.

Prerequisite(s): BUSI 280; third year standing.
(3-0; 3-0)

BUSI 363 Organizational Design and
Development (3 sem. hrs.)
This course focuses on how to design and
maintain organizational effectiveness through
developing appropriate levels of control and
coordination. This course introduces and critically
examines the current theories and approaches to
the management and structural design of
organizations, and assesses their relevance and
usefulness to organizations wanting to remain
competitive in a rapidly changing marketplace.

Prerequisite(s): BUSI 280; third year standing.
(3-0; 3-0)

BUSI 370 Business Information
Systems (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of the impact of information technology
and the ways in which organizations can achieve
competitive advantage and support of key
business functions through the strategic design,
deployment, and use of information technology.
The course teaches students the utilization of
spreadsheet, database management, and project
management software to manage the design,
deployment, and use of information technology
within an organizational setting.

Prerequisite(s): BUSI 222. (3-0 or 3-0)

BUSI 377 Operations Management (3
sem. hrs.)
This course considers the various operative
models with which firms attempt to create value.
Topics include quality theory, quality
measurement, production/supply chain planning
and execution, process design, and project
management. The course also covers information
tools necessary for effective operations, and
management of the service content of the firm’s
products.

Prerequisite(s): BUSI 275. (3-0; 3-0)

BUSI 381 Advanced Topics in
Operations Management (3 sem. hrs.)
This course looks at the management of
operations’ variables and their part in the overall
business strategy. Students will focus on one
chosen firm or industry, possibly with additional
focus on the business climate in a chosen
geographic region. Topic emphasis will vary
depending on the focus, but will include some
combination of: allocation and scheduling of
resources, inventory and quality control, personnel
needs, how to achieve production efficiencies and
cost control, operation layout and design, and
standards and methods development. Quantitative
management tools are incorporated.


                                                  161
NB: May not be offered every year.
Prerequisite(s): BUSI 377. (0-0; 3-0)

BUSI 395/396 Business in the Global
Market (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to global business practices while
on a travel study. The course surveys
governmental and corporate practices of major
economic systems throughout the world.
Different cultural meanings of concepts such as
globalization, world class, nimble organizations,
empowerment, and teams are explored. The class
provides students with experiential as well as
classroom learning to provide a better grasp of the
differences in cultures and the adaptation of the
concepts.

NB: Offered when available in summer with
overseas travel component and as part of the
Laurent Leadership Program.
Cross-listed: ECON 411.
Prerequisite(s): Permission of the instructor. (3-0
or 3-0)

BUSI 411 Business in the Global
Market (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to global business practices while
on a travel study. The course surveys
governmental and corporate practices of major
economic systems throughout the world.
Different cultural meanings of concepts such as
globalization, world class, nimble organizations,
empowerment, and teams are explored. The class
provides students with experiential as well as
classroom learning to provide a better grasp of the
differences in cultures and the adaptation of the
concepts.

NB: Offered when available in summer with
overseas travel component.
Cross-listed: ECON 411.
Prerequisite(s): Permission of the instructor. (3-0
or 3-0)

BUSI 412 International Economic
Competitiveness (3 sem. hrs.)
This course studies the competitiveness of
companies in different countries and regions given
ever-changing economic conditions and policies.
The course reviews factors that determine
competitive advantage including: factor
conditions, demand conditions, supporting
industries, firm strategy, and government policy.

Cross-listed: ECON 412.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 202; third year standing.
(3-0 or 3-0)

BUSI 413 Business as Mission (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course examines the emerging role of
business as mission, in both international and
domestic context. The general themes taught in
this course include: the theology of business as
mission; practical issues related to using business
as a vehicle for cross-cultural mission; and,
specific for-profit business models and case
studies.

Prerequisite(s): BUSI 311, 342, and fourth year
standing. (3-0 or 3-0)

BUSI 421 Advanced Accounting (3
sem. hrs.)
This course explores advanced topics such as
business combinations, foreign currency
transactions, translation of foreign financial
statements and the move toward international
accounting standards. Students acquire skills and
knowledge to analyze information from a
consolidated Canadian public company with
foreign currency transactions. Accounting for
non-profit organizations, segmented reporting and
interim financial accounting are also considered.

Prerequisite(s): BUSI 321. (3-0 or 3-0)

BUSI 426 External Auditing: Concepts
and Methods (3 sem. hrs.)
This course follows the risk based audit approach
and discusses quality assurance, professional
ethics, auditor responsibilities, legal liability, and
corporate governance issues. Topics include:
strategic systems approach to auditing; preparing
audit procedures that focus on the identified key
areas of risk; the internal control system and audit
reports; fraud awareness auditing, internal auditing
and public sector auditing; and the movement
toward international auditing standards.

Prerequisite(s): BUSI 321. (3-0 or 3-0)



                                                  162
BUSI 428 Canadian Taxation (3 sem.
hrs.)
An initial examination of Canadian income tax
legislation. Historical, legal, and theoretical
background concerning taxation in Canada are
presented. Current legislation is covered with
emphasis on tax-planning opportunities for
individuals and corporations.

Prerequisite(s): BUSI 222; third year standing.
(3-0 or 3-0)

BUSI 430 Marketing Research (3 sem.
hrs.)
The course covers the role of research in the
decision-making process. Objectives: first, to give
some familiarity with the tools of research that are
available; second, to learn by doing, i.e. to design
and execute a research project; third, to provide
some practice in the handling and interpretation
of research results.

Prerequisite(s): BUSI 231, 275; third year
business standing. (3-0 or 3-0)

BUSI 435 Marketing Management (3
sem. hrs.)
This course covers the concepts and problems
associated with the management of the marketing
function. The development of problem-solving,
teamwork, and effective communication skills are
undertaken in the course primarily through the use
of the case study method.

Prerequisite(s): BUSI 231; third year business
standing. (3-0 or 3-0)

BUSI 437 Advertising and Promotional
Strategy (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of advertising and promotional strategy,
promotional planning, the various media, the
mechanics of advertising, ethics, and advertising’s
role in modern society.

Prerequisite(s): BUSI 231; third year business
standing. (3-0 or 3-0)

BUSI 441 Advanced Topics in
Business Finance (3 sem. hrs.)
This course takes an in-depth look into advanced
topics in managerial finance including capital
budgeting, financing, risk management, and
working capital management. Students are
expected to apply the theory to real cases, and to
integrate the functional components of managerial
finance with not only the other functional areas of
business but also within the context of their
personal world view.

Prerequisite(s): BUSI 342. (3-0 or 3-0)

BUSI 442 Advanced Personal Financial
Planning (3 sem. hrs.)
This course, the capstone for the financial
planning track, takes an in-depth look into
advanced personal finance topics. Topics include
family law, risk management, retirement planning,
estate planning, and practice management. Case
studies are used to communicate these principles.

Prerequisite(s): BUSI 241; 317 or 318; 428. (3-0
or 3-0)

BUSI 443 Retirement and Estate
Planning (3 sem. hrs.)
This course covers the principles of successful
retirement and estate planning, and, therefore,
targets various aspects of how to develop,
monitor, and maintain a retirement plan and
strategy. As a result, the focus of the course is on
the theory and application of that theory to major
issues surrounding Retirement and Estate
Planning. The course is taught from a Christian
worldview and, therefore, emphasizes the
importance of humanity’s
responsibilities/stewardship of what it is
responsible for, and to who it is ultimately
accountable.

Prerequisite(s): BUSI 241, 428.

BUSI 446 Commercial Legal Relations
(3 sem. hrs.)
The legal environment within which businesses
must function, especially the legal relationships
between individuals and commercial
organizations. The legal relationships between the
corporation and shareholders, directors,
employees, financiers, debtors, lawyers, and
society in general.


                                                 163
NB: May not be offered every year.
Prerequisite(s): BUSI 346. (3-0 or 3-0)

BUSI 453 Managing and Developing
the Human Resource (3 sem. hrs.)
This course teaches conceptual and pragmatic
skills for the management and development of the
human resource within organizations. Topics
include: understanding the role of the internal
consultant; identifying, developing, implementing
employee development programs; creating
effective performance management systems; and
creating empowering work environments.

Prerequisite(s): BUSI 352. (3-0 or 3-0)

BUSI 454 Compensation and Work
Environment (3 sem. hrs.)
This course teaches conceptual and pragmatic
skills for creating a quality and engaging workplace
environment, including the concept of the “total
rewards system” and its elements, the design and
implementation of a compensation system, and
the essential components of workplace health and
safety.

Prerequisite(s): BUSI 352.

BUSI 459 Professional Practice in
Human Resource (3 sem. hrs.)
Students will design, manage, prepare and present
a comprehensive Human Resource management
project that will meet the requirements of a client
organization. Students will learn the practices of a
Human Resource professional by analyzing the
effectiveness of an organization’s current HR
systems and assisting in the creation of effective
and ethical HR systems that will better achieve the
organization’s mission and strategic goals. This
will include an analysis of internal and external
learning factors that have an influence on the
effectiveness of HRM activities.

Prerequisite(s): BUSI 352, 363, and instructor
approval.

BUSI 470 Information Systems
Project/Internship (3 or 4 sem. hrs.)
Application of several business disciplines and
information systems concepts, principles, and
practice in an actual business information system.
Students are expected to develop a complex
business information systems project. Students
work closely with the professor and individuals in
the information systems profession. Students may
also take the course as an internship while
working for an enterprise in an information
systems position.

Prerequisite(s): Fourth year standing; BUSI 222,
280; 342, 370, 371. (0-0; 3/4-0)

BUSI 480 Leadership in the Global
Context (3 sem. hrs.)
This course addresses issues faced by leaders
working in settings throughout the globe. Students
examine approaches to leadership and develop an
understanding of the important role culture plays
in multicultural organizational contexts. Cross-
cultural communication, cultural intelligence, and
individual and organizational behaviour in various
cultures are studied. Particular attention is given to
the servant leadership approach and how to
develop the mindset of an effective leader in both
non-governmental and for-profit organizational
contexts.

Cross-listed: ECON 480.
Prerequisite(s): Third year standing. (3-0 or 3-0)

BUSI 481 Business Ethics (3 sem. hrs.)
This course studies the role of business in
contemporary society where multiple demands are
placed upon it, the responsibility of a corporation
to its many constituencies, and responsiveness to
changing cultural climate. The course studies a
biblical basis for business ethics.

Prerequisite(s): Third year standing; one PHIL
course. (3-0 or 3-0)

BUSI 484 Strategic Management (3
sem. hrs.)
A capstone, integrative course that focuses on
how firms formulate, implement, and evaluate
strategies. Strategic management concepts and
techniques, and comprehensive strategic analyses
of organizations are considered.

Prerequisite(s): Fourth year business standing;
and BUSI 301, 342, 363, and 377. (3-0; 3-0)


                                                  164
BUSI 486 Small Business and
Entrepreneurship I (3 sem. hrs.)
A capstone, integrative course focused on key
concepts of entrepreneurship. Topics include the
nature and role of the entrepreneur; creating and
organizing new ventures; the tools and techniques
needed to facilitate and plan a new enterprise; and
the insight and judgment skills required in dealing
with new venture management. Students also
engage in preparation and presentation of a
comprehensive business plan.

Prerequisite(s): Fourth year business standing;
and BUSI 301, 342, 363, and 377. (3-0; 3-0)

BUSI 487 Small Business and
Entrepreneurship II (3 sem. hrs.)
This course studies entrepreneurial finance;
obtaining venture and growth capital; valuation,
structure, and negotiation of a deal; and obtaining
debt capital. The course also looks at managing
rapid growth and entrepreneurship beyond the
startup; the entrepreneur and the troubled
company; and the harvest and beyond.

Prerequisite(s): Fourth year business standing.
Recommended: BUSI 486. (0-0; 3-0)

BUSI 491 Integrated Group Project for
Accounting (3 sem. hrs.)
This course requires students to apply several
business disciplines - in an actual business setting -
to the development of a complex business project.
Students work closely with both the professor and
individuals in the business community.

NB: May not be offered every year.
Prerequisite(s): Fourth year business standing.
(3-0 or 3-0)

BUSI 492 Integrated Group Project for
Finance (3 sem. hrs.)
This course requires students to apply several
business disciplines - in an actual business setting -
to the development of a complex business project.
Students work closely with both the professor and
individuals in the business community.

NB: May not be offered every year.
Prerequisite(s): Fourth year business standing.
(3-0 or 3-0)

BUSI 493 Integrated Group Project for
Human Resource Management (3
sem. hrs.)
This course requires students to apply several
business disciplines - in an actual business setting -
to the development of a complex business project.
Students work closely with both the professor and
individuals in the business community.

NB: May not be offered every year.
Prerequisite(s): Fourth year business standing.
(3-0 or 3-0)

BUSI 494 Integrated Group Project for
International Business (3 sem. hrs.)
This course requires students to apply several
business disciplines - in an actual business setting -
to the development of a complex business project.
Students work closely with both the professor and
individuals in the business community.

NB: May not be offered every year.
Prerequisite(s): Fourth year business standing.
(3-0 or 3-0)

BUSI 495 Integrated Group Project for
Leadership and Management (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course requires students to apply several
business disciplines - in an actual business setting -
to the development of a complex business project.
Students work closely with both the professor and
individuals in the business community.

NB: May not be offered every year.
Prerequisite(s): Fourth year business standing.
(3-0 or 3-0)

BUSI 496 Integrated Group Project for
Marketing (3 sem. hrs.)
This course requires students to apply several
business disciplines - in an actual business setting -
to the development of a complex business project.
Students work closely with both the professor and
individuals in the business community.

NB: May not be offered every year.


                                                  165
Prerequisite(s): Fourth year business standing.
(3-0 or 3-0)

BUSI 497 Integrated Group Project for
Financial Planning (3 sem. hrs.)
This course requires students to apply several
business disciplines - in an actual business setting -
to the development of a complex business project.
Students work closely with both the professor and
individuals in the business community.

NB: May not be offered every year.
Prerequisite(s): Fourth year business standing.
(3-0 or 3-0)



Business
Administration,
Graduate Courses
MBA 501 Marketing Management (3
sem. hrs.)
This course explores the theoretical underpinnings
of the discipline of marketing in order to develop
a conceptual framework to critique the practice of
marketing in the early twenty-first century. This
course utilizes extensive case analysis techniques
to enhance the manager’s ability to develop and
critique marketing plans in both the for-profit and
non-profit business sectors.

MBA 521 Managerial Accounting (3
sem. hrs.)
Managerial Accounting provides managers with an
understanding of internal reporting of operating
results, including the tools they need to interpret
key financial information and improve overall
performance. Management accounting plays a vital
decision-making role in today’s lean organization.
Topics include cost concepts and applications,
cost-volume-profit relationships, product costing,
budgeting, and standard costing.

MBA 525 Managerial Economics (3
sem. hrs.)
This course applies economic theories and
quantitative methods to management decision-
making. Solutions for many important
management decision problems in the areas of
product selection, pricing, investment, and
organization design can be found in managerial
economics using relevant economic theories and
quantitative methods. Topics include theory of the
firm, theory of consumer demand, industrial
organization, game theory, forecasting, statistical
estimation, decision-making under uncertainty,
and capital budgeting.

MBA 542 Managerial Finance (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course provides an opportunity for the
manager to develop good understanding in the
areas of capital investment and financing. The
capital investment decision allocates scarce
resources to projects in the organization and
involves asset valuation, capital budgeting, risk
management, working capital management, and
performance assessment. The financing decision
chooses sources of cash to finance the investment
decisions and involves capital structure, financial
instruments, the risk-return trade-off, financial
planning, and the cost of capital. Ethical
considerations and management in the global
context from a Christian worldview are integrated
into these topics.

Prerequisite(s): MBA 521.

MBA 552 Human Resource
Management (3 sem. hrs.)
This course focuses on the strategic use of human
resource practices to reinforce and support the
core capabilities of the organization. The course
reviews the functions of human resource
management, organizational behaviour, and
organizational theory within a business and a non-
profit setting, with a special emphasis on doing
business in the global marketplace. The course
examines how organizations plan for, attract,
retain, and manage employees for a sustained
competitive advantage.

MBA 570 Information and Knowledge
Management Systems (3 sem. hrs.)
This course provides an overview and
understanding of the issues involved in the
strategic management of the information and
knowledge assets of national, international, and


                                               166
transnational organizations. The course examines
a broad range of issues and problems associated
with information systems (IS) and knowledge
management systems (KMS) and their alignment
with the strategic goals of an organization. The
course includes a comparative study of present
theories with particular attention to the role of
computer-based information and knowledge
management systems in the organizational policy
of a variety of business, government, and other
institutions.

MBA 571 Operations Management (3
sem. hrs.)
This course considers the various operative
models by which firms attempt to create value. It
is assumed that business operations are conducted
to realize the aims of the business strategy.
Toward that end, students develop the skills and
the thinking necessary to maximize the
effectiveness of the operations. Topics include
quality, production/supply chain planning,
production/supply chain execution, process
design, and project management. Analytical
methods are introduced when appropriate.
Specific consideration is given to the correct
management of the service content of the firm’s
products.

MBA 590, 591, 592 Christian
Leadership and Ethics (1, 1, 1 sem. hr.)
This unique course consists of three modules
taken in sequence over three semesters. The
course explores a Christian perspective on
business and how it impacts management and
leadership of organizations. The course introduces
students to cutting edge leadership theory,
techniques, and tools. Topics include general
leadership principles, motivation and behavioral
change, decision-making, vision setting,
understanding group dynamics, team building,
communication processes, understanding power,
and conflict resolution. The course includes a self-
assessment of leadership skills and focuses on
Christian values and ethics in the marketplace,
surveying Christian perspectives of morality as
they relate to particular business leadership issues.
This includes examination of ethical issues arising
in the areas of corporate social responsibility,
dispute resolution, employee rights, advertising,
and the use of information technology.
MBA 593 Christian Leadership and
Ethics (3 sem. hrs.)
This course explores a Christian perspective
on business and how it impacts management
and leadership of organizations. This course
introduces students to cutting edge leadership
theory, techniques, and tools. Topics include:
general leadership principles, motivation and
behavioral change, decision-making, vision setting,
understanding group dynamics, team building,
communication processes, understanding power,
and conflict resolution. The course includes a self-
assessment of leadership skills and focuses on
Christian values and ethics in the marketplace,
surveying Christian perspectives of morality as
they relate to particular business leadership issues.
This includes examination of ethical issues arising
in the areas of corporate social responsibility,
dispute resolution, employee rights, advertising,
and the use of information technology.

MBA 594 Leadership and Ethics (3
sem. hrs.)
This course introduces students to cutting edge
leadership theory, techniques, and tools. Topics
include general leadership principles, motivation
and behavioural change, decision making, vision
setting, understanding group dynamics, team
building, communication processes, understanding
power, and conflict resolution. The course
includes a self-assessment of leadership skills and
focuses on values and ethics in the marketplace,
surveying perspectives of morality as they relate to
particular business leadership issues. This includes
examination of ethical issues arising in the areas of
corporate social responsibility, dispute resolution,
employee rights, advertising, and the use of
information technology.

MBA 650 Integrated Project for a Non-
Profit Organization (3 sem. hrs.)
This integrated project for a non-profit
organization requires students to apply several
management disciplines to the development of a
complex project in an actual non-profit
community setting. Students will work closely with
both the professor and individuals in the
nonprofit community to complete the project. All
projects are to be approved by the MBA Director.




                                                 167
MBA 651 The Formation and Structure
of Nonprofit and Charitable
Organizations (3 sem. hrs.)
This course explores the elements of an effective
start-up of a charitable organization. They include
analysis of steps needed to form a charitable
organization, development of a business plan,
recruiting leadership, establishing a board,
securing seed funding, and much more. The
course also analyzes why some organizations
succeed while others do not.

MBA 652 Management and Leadership
for Nonprofit and Charitable
Organizations (3 sem. hrs.)
This course examines the unique characteristics
and role of nonprofit organizations in our society.
From this perspective, we seek to understand the
role of effective management and leadership of
nonprofits, with attention to factors that leaders
may use to improve the effectiveness of their
organizations. Through case description and
theoretical analysis, students learn about major
differences between managing nonprofit and
profit-making organizations. Students acquire
skills focused on governance, financing, and
general management of nonprofit organizations.

MBA 653 Legal Issues for Charitable
Organizations (3 sem. hrs.)
Managers of nonprofit and charitable
organizations face numerous legal challenges not
faced by corporate managers. The course
examines a number of such legal challenges
including formation of the charity, obtaining
charitable status, reporting requirements,
charitable governance, employment and human
rights concerns including codes of conduct and
lifestyle requirements, working with volunteers,
and exposure to tort liability.

MBA 654 Grants, Funding, and Not-
for-Profit Marketing (3 sem. hrs.)
Securing adequate resources is a challenge for all
non-profit organizations. Funding can be obtained
from a variety of sources, including grants, user
fees, gifts and bequests, and investments. This
course provides the tools for properly assessing
the funding mix of an organization and
developing strategies to increase revenue streams.
In particular, topics such as fee setting and
collection, grant writing, investment management,
public relations, and donor development and
relations are covered.

MBA 655 Financial Management of
Nonprofit and Charitable
Organizations (3 sem. hrs.)
The practice of financial management in nonprofit
organizations is significantly different from that in
for-profit businesses. Many of the differences
stem from the difficulty of measuring and valuing
outputs, and from restrictions imposed by donors
and grant-making agencies. This course considers
accounting, budgeting, financing, investment, and
other financial management activities in non-
profit organizations, including fund accounting,
form and interpretation of financial statements,
endowment management issues, federal and
provincial regulation, measurement and evaluation
of organizational performance, and control
systems design. This course is ideally suited for
students who expect to manage non-profit
organizations or serve on nonprofit boards.

MBA 660 Business Internship (3 sem.
hrs.)
This integrated project for a non-profit
organization requires students to apply several
management disciplines to the development of a
complex project in an actual non-profit
community setting. Students will work closely with
both the professor and individuals in the
nonprofit community to complete the project. All
projects are to be approved by the MBA Director.

MBA 661 Global Economic
Competitiveness (3 sem. hrs.)
This course includes the study of the
competitiveness of companies in different
countries and regions given ever-changing
economic conditions and government policies.
General trends in the increasingly interdependent
global economy are reviewed. With an integrated
global economy, the production process is
increasingly fragmented, and the implications of
this fragmentation on competitiveness are
reviewed. Other topics included in the course are:
the emergence of the Chinese and Indian
economies and their impact on the global
economy, the acceleration of regional economic


                                                 168
integration in Europe, North America, and Asia,
and the implication of such for the global
economy.

MBA 662 Managing a Global
Organization (3 sem. hrs.)
This course examines a number of issues
particularly critical to the management of
international businesses or multinational firms.
These topics include an examination of
comparative management practices including
similarities and differences in cross-cultural
management styles; a comparison of Pacific Rim,
European Union, and North American value
systems; and an analysis of best practices and their
impact in industries such as automotive,
electronics, education, and medical services. The
course includes discussion of current international
business issues including: the future of
globalization, the impact of outsourcing, and
particular areas of corporate risk including foreign
exchange and the political/social climate. The
course also explores current economic and
business planning in multilingual organizations.

MBA 663 Canadian and International
Business Law (3 sem. hrs.)
This course provides students with an
understanding of the legal environment in which
Canadian businesses operate. The course focuses
on key areas of the legal environment that
particularly impact business decision-making. This
includes an understanding of the Canadian legal
system, risk management, business torts,
contractual principles, corporate formation and
governance, and employment law. The course also
examines the often challenging legal regime within
which international businesses operate. This
includes an overview of key legal systems around
the world, international dispute resolution,
understanding treaties and conventions,
international contract issues, and intellectual
property concerns.

MBA 664 International Finance and
Accounting (3 sem. hrs.)
This course explores important accounting and
finance issues for firms operating in a
multinational environment. The course provides
an overview of international differences in
accounting and financial reporting and the need
for international harmonization of accounting
standards. It particularly examines accounting and
finance issues faced by corporations operating in
the United States, Europe, and the Pacific Rim.
The course also explores the implication of
governments, standard setting bodies, and other
regulators in both developed and emerging
markets increasingly requiring the use of IFRS
either by listed companies or all companies.

Prerequisite(s): MBA 521, 542.

MBA 665 Comparative International
Management (Travel Course) (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course provides a direct introduction to
global business practices. The course is normally
taught as part of an overseas travel experience.
This provides students with experiential as well as
classroom learning and enables students to better
grasp the differences between cultures, and to
understand each culture’s respective management
techniques.

NB: There is an additional travel fee for this
course.

MBA 671 Enterprise Start-Up and
Positioning (3 sem. hrs.)
This course explores the process of creating a new
venture, including opportunity recognition,
feasibility analysis, business plan creation, and
financing. This course looks at factors that lead
towards entrepreneurial success including
characteristics of the entrepreneur. Class
discussion and case analyses present decision-
making techniques and skills required to evaluate
business start-up strategies.

MBA 672 Business and Venture
Financing (3 sem. hrs.)
This course focuses on the development of
strategies for financing entrepreneurial ventures. It
includes analysis of numerous funding sources
including debt, venture capital, and private equity
financing. It includes a study of the contractual
and operational relationships that exist between
suppliers of venture capital, intermediaries, and
the entrepreneurial firm. The course also assists
managers in understanding how to pragmatically
structure and negotiate the financing deal.


                                                 169
Prerequisite(s): MBA 542.

MBA 673 Strategic Issues in Marketing
the Growing Enterprise (3 sem. hrs.)
This course familiarizes students with writings and
research in the areas of e-marketing, global
marketing, internal marketing, relationship
marketing, services marketing, and sports
marketing, particularly with respect to how each
impacts the growing enterprise. The rapidly
evolving field of marketing requires extensive
discussion around these various topics and the
ability to connect these seemingly disparate topics
together within an integrated theoretical marketing
framework.

MBA 674 Leadership, Management,
and Systems Change (3 sem. hrs.)
Growing enterprises often encounter leadership,
management, and systems problems caused by
their growth. To sustain growth, the activities of
entrepreneurs usually have to change from
innovation to delegation, with greater levels of
communication and organization. Different
functional and leadership skills are needed at
various stages of growth. External supports, such
as accountants, lawyers, and investors, often have
to be incorporated into the operations of the firm.
In addition, corporate systems require significant
change as the enterprise grows. This course is
designed to identify the reasons for, and the tools
to make critical leadership, management, and
systems change as the enterprise grows.

MBA 675 The Legal Environment of
Business (3 sem. hrs.)
This course provides students with an
understanding of the legal environment in which
Canadian businesses operate. The course focuses
on key areas of the legal environment that
particularly impact business decision-making
including the legal system and risk management,
contractual principles and issues, corporate
formation and governance, partnerships, agency,
employment and human rights issues, intellectual
property considerations, and business torts.

MBA 680 International Finance and
Global Capital Markets (3 sem. hrs.)
This course is designed to develop a critical
managerial perspective on key financial
management issues confronting firms operating in
a global environment. Through developing an
understanding of financial markets, systems, and
institutions, students will address a wide range of
topics including equity, debt, foreign exchange,
and credit instruments, as well as the principal
derivative products. In a step-by-step fashion,
making extensive use of real-world cases and
examples, students will engage in such topics as:
money markets, foreign exchange, bond markets,
cash equity markets, equity valuation techniques,
swaps, forwards, futures, credit derivatives,
options, option risk management and convertible
bonds.

NB: This course is offered as an option for Great
Wall MBA students instead of MBA 665.
Prerequisite(s): MBA 542, 661, 664. (3-0 or 3-0)

MBA 684 Strategic Management (6
sem. hrs.)
This course focuses on competitive strategy at the
corporate and business unit level. Strategy
development is highly complex and this course
helps students to develop skills that identify issues
and properly address them. The format of the
class is designed for thought and practice on the
part of each student Key topics include: learning
curve, relative market share, value chain; Porter’s 5
Forces, BCG, GE, PIMS, EVA and other such
concepts; mission statement, competitive
positioning, SWOT and other aspects of analyzing
one’s own organization; forecasting - sources of
information, trends, and analysis; critically
analyzing situations and persuasively presenting
solutions to various audiences; ethics and
corporate responsibilities; and implementation
strategies.

Prerequisite(s): MBA 501, 521, 542, and 552.



Career Preparation
PREP 100 Career Preparation (1 sem.
hr.)
This course takes a strength-based approach and
is open to any student interested in exploring


                                                 170
career options and learning effective job search
methods.

NB: Pass/Fail course.
Prerequisite(s): None.



Chemistry
CHEM 101 Elementary Elements (3
sem. hrs.)
This course offers non-science majors a way to
rekindle their love of science in an exciting,
student-centered, integrative, hands-on approach
in the classroom. It seeks to explore connections
between an atom and the universe, matter and its
properties, how living organisms exist and survive,
and how the first people in Canada interacted with
their environment. It also explores how to
effectively evaluate and articulate core global and
local scientific issues from a chemistry vantage
point. CHEM 101 is a Scientific Method and Lab
Research option within TWU’s Core Foundations.
It is also recommended for students in
Elementary streamed programs within Education.

Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0-2; 0-0-0)

CHEM 103 General Chemistry I (3
sem. hrs.)
This course is intended for students with a
background of high school chemistry less than
Chemistry 12 (students with Chemistry 12
normally go into CHEM 111), as an introduction
to chemical concepts where topics include
stoichiometry, the nature of solutions, acids and
bases, and oxidation/reduction reactions, the gas
laws, thermochemistry, the periodic table,
bonding, molecular structure, and descriptive
inorganic chemistry.

NB: Like CHEM 111, this course provides the
prerequisite for other chemistry and biology
courses needed in a science major at TWU.
CHEM 103 includes one extra lecture per week
compared to the alternative 111 course to allow
students with less preparation in their background
to develop adequate chemical skills over the first
year.
Co-requisite(s): CHEM 198 Lab. (1 credit)
Prerequisite(s): None. (4-1-3; 0-0-0)

CHEM 104 General Chemistry II (3
sem. hrs.)
This course is a continuation of CHEM 103.
Topics include: chemical equilibrium, acids, bases
and buffer systems, solubility equilibria,
elementary energy concepts, electrochemistry and
an introduction to organic chemistry. These
concepts are discussed as far as possible in the
context of their significance in life processes, in
industrial process, and in the environment.

NB: CHEM 104 is the normal sequel to CHEM
103. Like CHEM 112, this course provides the
prerequisite for other chemistry and biology
courses needed in a science major at TWU.
CHEM 104 includes one extra lecture per week
compared to the alternative 112 course to aid
development of adequate chemical skills over the
first year.
Co-requisite(s): CHEM 199 Lab. (1 credit)
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 103 or equivalent or
instructor’s consent. (0-0-0; 4-1-3)

CHEM 111 Principles of Chemistry I (3
sem. hrs.)
This course considers modern concepts in the
fundamental laws and principles of chemistry.
Investigated topics include stoichiometry, and
chemical calculations, nature of solutions, acids,
bases and buffer systems, solubility equilibria,
elementary energy concepts, electrochemistry and
an introduction to organic chemistry,
thermochemistry, the periodic table, bonding
molecular structure and descriptive inorganic
chemistry.

NB: Credit is not given for both CHEM 103 and
111.
Co-requisite(s): CHEM 198 Lab. (1 credit)
Prerequisite(s): Chemistry 12 or instructor’s
permission. (3-1-3; 0-0-0)

CHEM 112 Principles of Chemistry II
(3 sem. hrs.)
Modern concepts in the fundamental laws and
principles of chemistry: Introduction to chemical
kinetics, chemical equilibrium, acids, bases and
buffer systems, solubility equilibria, elementary
energy concepts, electrochemistry and an


                                                171
introduction to organic chemistry. These concepts
are discussed as far as possible in the context of
their significance in life processes, in industrial
process, and in the environment.

NB: Credit is not given for both CHEM 104 and
112. CHEM 111 normally precedes CHEM 112.
Students who do not achieve a B in CHEM 111
should take CHEM 104 instead of CHEM 112.
Co-requisite(s): CHEM 199 Lab (1 credit)
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 103 or 111 with a grade
of B or higher, or Chemistry 12 or equivalent with
instructor’s permission. (0-0-0; 3-1-3)

CHEM 198 Lab for CHEM 103 & 111 (1
sem. hr.)
This lab course will compliment either the CHEM
103 or CHEM 111 lectures. It is meant to give
students an opportunity to apply the learning that
is happening in class in a hands-on way. The
chemical concepts learned in CHEM 103 or
CHEM 111 will be explored (topics include:
stoichiometry, the nature of solutions, acids and
bases, oxidation/reduction reactions,
thermochemistry, the periodic table, bonding,
molecular structure and colligative properties).
This chemistry lab is also meant to introduce
students to lab safety, common lab practices and
lab techniques that will be required for upper level
science courses and beyond.

NB: This lab is a co-requisite for CHEM 103 and
CHEM 111.

CHEM 199 Lab for CHEM 104 & 112
(1 sem. hr.)
This lab course will complement either the
CHEM 104 or CHEM 112 lectures. It is meant to
give students an opportunity to apply the learning
that is happening in class in a hands-on way. The
chemical concepts learned in CHEM 104 or
CHEM 112 will be explored (topics include:
solubility, kinetics, chemical equilibrium, organic
synthesis and extraction, buffer chemistry and
electrochemistry). This lab involves a special
project where students will get to explore, in
depth, an area of choice and present that
knowledge to the class. This chemistry lab is also
meant to introduce students to lab safety,
common lab practices, and lab techniques that will
be required for upper level science courses and
beyond.

NB: This lab is a co-requisite for CHEM 104 and
CHEM 112.

CHEM 221, 222 Organic Chemistry (3,
3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to theoretical, physical, and
descriptive organic chemistry. A study of the
properties of aliphatic, alicyclic, and simple
aromatic compounds, along with introductory
spectroscopy is examined. The laboratory course
illustrates the operations, representative reactions,
and syntheses of organic chemistry.

NB: CHEM 221 precedes CHEM 222.
Prerequisite(s): Students must have one of
CHEM 103 or 111, and one of CHEM 104 or
112. (3-1-4; 3-1-4)

CHEM 230 Inorganic Chemistry (3
sem. hrs.)
This course studies the chemical and physical
properties of the elements and inorganic
compounds using atomic orbital theory and the
theory of bonding in molecules and crystalline
solids. Main group element chemistry and the
structure of the periodic table are emphasized
throughout.

Prerequisite(s): Students must have one of
CHEM 103 or 111, and one of CHEM 104 or
112. (3-0 or 3-0)

CHEM 240 Physical Chemistry (3 sem.
hrs.)
An introduction to thermodynamics as applied to
chemical reactions. Topics include: the First and
Second Laws of Thermodynamics, free energy and
equilibria, phase equilibria, ideal and dilute
solutions of non-electrolytes.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: PHYS 240.
Prerequisite(s): Students must have one of
CHEM 103 or 111 and one of CHEM 104 or 112;
MATH 123, 124. (3-4 or 3-4)




                                                  172
CHEM 321, 322 Advanced Organic
Chemistry (3, 3 sem. hrs.)
Methods for spectroscopic determination of
structures in organic chemistry. The course covers
functional chemistry of organic substances that
have particular relevance to the life sciences;
modern synthetic techniques for functional group
transformation; principles involved in the
planning and execution of multi-step synthesis of
organic molecules; and laboratory in synthetic
methods and spectroscopic techniques.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 221, 222. (3-4; 3-0)

CHEM 341 Advanced Physical
Chemistry I (3 sem. hrs.)
The fundamental concepts of matter and its
structure in relation to energy. Quantum
mechanics, statistical thermodynamics,
spectroscopy, kinetics, and the solid state are
considered.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: PHYS 341.
Co-requisite(s): MATH 223.
Prerequisite(s): PHYS 111, 112, CHEM 240. (3-
4; 3-0)

CHEM 342 Advanced Physical
Chemistry II (3 sem. hrs.)
The fundamental concepts of matter in relation to:
Kinetic Molecular Theory, Transport Phenomena,
Elementary Kinetics, Complex Reaction
Mechanisms and Catalysis.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 123, PHYS 111, 112,
CHEM 240, or permission from the instructor. (3-
0)

CHEM 357, 358 Modern Analytical
Methods (3, 3 sem. hrs.)
Introduction to the theory and practice of
analytical chemistry. After a review of the basic
laboratory techniques used in pure and applied
chemistry and in biological chemistry, the course
discusses a number of instrumental techniques,
particularly those based on chromatographic,
electromagnetic radiation, and electrochemical
theories.

NB: CHEM 357 should precede CHEM 358. Not
offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): Students must have one of
CHEM 103 or 111, and one of CHEM 104 or
112; and a 200 level or above chemistry lab
course. (3-4; 3-4)

CHEM 370 Environmental Chemistry
(3 sem. hrs.)
The study of chemical reactions as they relate to
the environment. The course takes a
biogeochemical approach with emphasis placed
on the deleterious effects that human activities
and technologies have had on atmospheric,
aquatic, and terrestrial systems. Methods to
alleviate environmental problems are considered.

Prerequisite(s): Students must have one of
CHEM 103 or 111 and one of CHEM 104 or 112.
Recommended: CHEM 221, 222. (0-0; 3-4)

CHEM 372 Molecular Genetics (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course considers modern developments and
techniques in genetics, especially the basic and
applied aspects of recombinant DNA technology.

NB: CHEM 372 may only be applied to the Life
Sciences Emphasis Program in chemistry.
Cross-listed: BIOL 372.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 113, 114; a minimum C
grade in CHEM 223; students must have one of
CHEM 103 or 111 and one of CHEM 104 or 112.
Recommended: CHEM 221, 222 (0-0; 3-3)

CHEM 384 Principles of Biochemistry
(3 sem. hrs.)
The study of chemical structure, function, and
metabolism of carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, and
nucleic acids. This class is continued as CHEM
386.

Cross-listed: BIOL 384.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 221, 222.
Recommended: BIOL 113, 114, 223. (3-1-3; 0-0-
0)

CHEM 386 Biosynthesis (3 sem. hrs.)

                                                 173
In this course, two aspects of biochemistry are
developed: (1) The modern understanding of the
biochemical transfer of genetic information: DNA
structure and synthesis, transcription, and
translation. These are related to developments in
recombinant DNA technology. (2) An
introduction to physiological biochemistry
including vision, muscle contraction, and
neurotransmission.

NB: CHEM 386 may only be applied to the Life
Sciences Emphasis and honours programs in
chemistry.
Cross-listed: BIOL 386.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 221, 222.
Recommended: BIOL 113, 114, 223. (0-0; 3-0)

CHEM 400 Directed Studies in
Chemistry (2 or 3 sem. hrs.)
Students are required to produce an outline of the
topic to be studied in consultation with the
instructor. A course of reading and/or
experimentation is pursued according to the
approved outline. Assessment may be via
examination and/or a final written report.

NB: This course with the appropriate choice of
topics can be used as preparation for the senior
thesis (CHEM 410).
Prerequisite(s): Advanced standing in chemistry
or instructor’s consent.

CHEM 409 Thesis Preparation (1 sem.
hr.)
In consultation with a faculty advisor, the student
will propose a chemical research project, which
will actually be investigated in the follow-up
course, CHEM 410. The student must first do a
thorough search of the relevant chemical
literature. A specific project proposal is then to be
formulated and presented in a written report.

Prerequisite(s): Advanced standing in chemistry
or instructor’s consent.

CHEM 410 Senior Thesis (2 sem. hrs.)
This course follows up on CHEM 409; the
research project that was proposed in CHEM 409
is actually carried out in CHEM 410. This is done
under the supervision of a faculty member of the
chemistry department. As a result, there are no
lectures; rather the course is centered on the lab.
In addition to the facilities at Trinity Western,
other facilities may be utilized where possible and
useful. The project will result in a written thesis
and public presentation.

Prerequisite(s): CHEM 409, a related directed
study in preparation, or instructor’s consent.

CHEM 411 Senior Thesis (3 sem. hrs.)
Students research a chosen area of chemistry and
provide a final written report.

NB: This course can only be taken by prior
arrangement with the department chair and the
Office of the Registrar.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 409, a related directed
study in preparation, or instructor’s consent.

CHEM 431, 432 Advanced Inorganic
Chemistry (3, 3 sem. hrs.)
This course looks at the chemistry of the
transition metals. Emphasis during the first
semester is on classical coordination chemistry,
including stereochemistry, symmetry, theories of
bonding and electronic structure in complexes.
The second semester includes a variety of special
topics in inorganic chemistry, such as
organometallic chemistry, catalysis, and
bioinorganic chemistry.

NB: CHEM 431 should precede 432. Not offered
every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 230. (3-4; 3-0)

CHEM 461 Chemical Concepts in
Nanotechnology (3 sem. hrs.)
Nanotechnology is the use of science, engineering
and technology for the design and implementation
of protocols that lead to novel materials as well as
devices on the nanometer size. The objective of
this course will be to provide students with an
introduction to the principles that underpin the
synthesis, characterization and application(s) of a
selected range of organic and inorganic
nanomaterials/nanostructures. In addition to this
the ethical and safety issues that face the field of
nanotechnology will be given consideration.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.



                                                174
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 221, 222, 230, 240;
PHYS 111, 112; MATH 123; or instructor’s
consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

CHEM 469 Polymer Chemistry (3 sem.
hrs.)
A study of organic and structural aspects of
several polymer families, physical properties
including molecular weight and distribution,
solution properties of macromolecules, kinetics of
polymerization in free radical, ionic, and
condensation systems. Stereochemistry of
polymers. Application to the properties of selected
synthetic rubbers and plastics.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 221, 222. (3-0 or 3-0)



Chinese
CHIN 101, 102 Introduction to Chinese
Language and Culture I & II (3, 3 sem.
hrs.)
A basic introduction to Mandarin Chinese for
students with no previous knowledge of either
Mandarin or Cantonese. The courses focus on
speaking and listening comprehension, but also
introduce reading and writing. With Chinese
culture as a major component, students gain
insight into the significance of China today and
over the centuries.

Prerequisite(s): None; CHIN 101 is a
prerequisite for CHIN 102, or Instructor’s
permission following a successful Mandarin
Placement test. (3-1; 3-1)

CHIN 201, 202 Intermediate Chinese
Language and Culture I & II (3, 3 sem.
hrs.)
These courses develop students’ Chinese language
skills and provide them with further insight into
Chinese culture and history. With an emphasis on
improving communication skills, the courses offer
extensive practice in listening, speaking, reading,
and writing. Students read various authentic texts,
review and study grammar, and expand their
cultural understanding through readings, film, and
discussion with the instructor. A field trip to the
Chinese community enables students to practise
their language skills and experience Chinese
culture firsthand.

NB: Presently offered as directed studies.
Prerequisite(s): CHIN 102; CHIN 201 should
precede CHIN 202; or instructor’s permission
following a successful Mandarin Placement test.

CHIN 211, 212 Decoding Chinese
Mythologies I & II (3, 3 sem. hrs.)
Through analyzing selected texts from Chinese
mythologies and the Bible, students will come to
understand the formation of Chinese ideology and
to consider Chinese cultural texts from a Christian
perspective. While expanding the students’
vocabulary and grammatical structures, this course
will also help them increase their proficiency in
formal written expression in Mandarin, as well as
improve their skills in critical reading and writing.
Courses given entirely in Mandarin.

Prerequisite(s): Instructor’s permission,
following a successful Mandarin Placement test;
CHIN 211 should precede CHIN 212. Courses
are for Chinese native-language speakers or those
with equivalent level of competency.

CHIN 301, 302 Intermediate Chinese
Language and Culture III & IV (3, 3
sem. hrs.)
These courses are intended to further improve
students’ Chinese language skills and to expand
their understanding of the Chinese culture and
history. With an emphasis on both spoken and
written Chinese, the courses help students enlarge
their Chinese vocabulary, improve their speaking
skills, enhance their understanding of Chinese
grammar, and develop their writing skills in
Chinese. Through reading authentic Chinese texts
of increasing difficulty, students gain a greater
mastery of the language and a better
understanding of Chinese culture.

NB: Presently offered as directed studies.
Prerequisite(s): CHIN 202 for CHIN 301;
CHIN 301 for CHIN 302; or instructor’s
permission following a successful Mandarin
Placement test.



                                                 175
CHIN 311, 312 Comparative Study of
the Analects of Confucius I & II (3, 3
sem. hrs.)
Through a comparative inquiry into the texts of
Confucius, the biblical Proverbs, and the gospel of
Matthew, students will gain fresh insight into the
core values of Chinese culture. While expanding
the students’ vocabulary and grammatical
structures, these courses will also help them
increase proficiency in formal written Mandarin,
as well as improve their ability in critical reading
and writing.

Prerequisite(s): CHIN 211, 212, or instructor’s
permission following a successful Mandarin
Placement test. CHIN 311 should precede CHIN
312. Courses are for Chinese native-language
speakers or those with equivalent level of
competency.

CHIN 321, 322 Classical Chinese
Literature I & II (3, 3 sem. hrs.)
Through comparative inquiry into classical
Chinese literature and history and the biblical
books of I & II Kings, students will gain fresh
insight into Chinese cultural practices and
ideology. Students will continue to develop
proficiency in Chinese language skills and expand
their understanding of Chinese history and
culture. Emphasis will be on improving students’
ability to critically read and analyze simplified
Chinese texts.

Prerequisite(s): CHIN 312 for 321, or
instructor’s permission following a successful
Mandarin Placement test. CHIN 321 for 322.
Courses are for Chinese native-language speakers
or those with equivalent level of competency.

CHIN 401, 402 Advanced Chinese
Language and Culture I & II (3, 3 sem.
hrs.)
As advanced courses in Mandarin Chinese, CHIN
401 and 402 continue to improve students’
capabilities in the skills of listening
comprehension, speaking, reading, and writing,
with an emphasis on conversational skills. With
extensive listening, speaking, and reading practice,
these courses will help students enlarge their
Chinese vocabulary, improve their oral skills,
increase their understanding of Chinese grammar,
and enrich their knowledge of Chinese culture.

Prerequisite(s): CHIN 302; CHIN 401 should
precede 402; or instructor’s permission following a
successful Mandarin Placement test. Courses are
for Chinese native-language speakers or those
with an equivalent level of competency.

CHIN 411, 412 Modern Chinese Texts
I & II (3, 3 sem. hrs.)
Intensive reading courses for students who have
acquired advanced reading skills in modern
Chinese. Selected reading materials cover a wide
range of modern and contemporary Chinese
fiction, nonfiction and cinematic texts from 1975
to the present. Through intensive reading of some
influential works of this period, students will gain
a better understanding of the development and
major themes of modern Chinese culture.

NB: Presently offered as directed studies.
Prerequisite(s): CHIN 402; or Grade 12
Chinese; or instructor’s permission following a
successful Mandarin Placement test; CHIN 411
should precede CHIN 412. Courses are for
Chinese native-language speakers or those with
equivalent level of competency.



Computing Science
NB: Students studying programming must master
very large amounts of technical material and
demonstrate their mastery in written form. For
this reason, a high level of English reading and
writing skills is required before taking the
following courses. Students who lack such skills
should take courses to develop them before
considering enrolment in any programming
course.
CMPT courses numbered below 130 do not count
towards a mathematics, applied mathematics with
computing science, or computing science major,
concentration, or minor.

CMPT 113 Computational Thinking
and Information Systems (3 sem. hrs.)
The student will gain a broad introductory
understanding of information systems, including


                                                176
how modern computers interact with networks.
The student will gain problem solving skills by
employing computational thinking, testing, and
debugging techniques. No prior computing
experience is required. Not for students with
existing credit for or exemption from CMPT 140
or 166. This course may not be counted toward a
minor, concentration or major in computing
science.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): None. (3-3 or 3-3)

CMPT 123 Data Analysis for
Information Systems (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to spreadsheets and databases.
Cell formulas, charts, macro programming are
examined. Database design, decomposition; basic
SQL. Tools such as Excel, Access, and MS-SQL
may be used, but the focus is on concepts and
design rather than skills with specific tools.

Prerequisite(s): CMPT 113 or 140, or equivalent.
(3-1-3 or 3-1-3)

CMPT 140 Introduction to Computing
Science and Programming I (3 sem.
hrs.)
An elementary introduction to computing science
and programming as a problem-solving tool.
Fundamental concepts and terminology of
computing science will be introduced.
Programming skill will be obtained by using a
high-level language. Topics will include:
abstraction, data types and control structures,
fundamental algorithms and pseudocode,
computability and complexity, and computer
architecture.

Prerequisite(s): None. (3-1-3 or 3-1-3)

CMPT 150 Introduction to Discrete
Math (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to those branches of pure
mathematics which are most commonly used in
the study of Computing Science and/or have
other practical applications. Topics include logic,
proofs, switching circuits, set theory, induction,
functions, languages, finite automata,
combinatorics, and algebraic structures.
NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: MATH 150.
Prerequisite(s): BC high school Mathematics 12,
or Pre-Calculus 12, or MATH 105, or the
equivalent. (3-1-0 or 0-0-0)

CMPT 166 Introduction to Computing
Science and Programming II (3 sem.
hrs.)
A rigorous introduction to computing science and
computer programming. Students will learn in-
depth programming concepts by seeing how
object oriented (OO) concepts are employed in
the design and writing of code in a variety of
notations. The emphasis is on the theory of OO
programming and design of solutions, as well as
implementation using an OO language such as
Java or C++.

Prerequisite(s): CMPT 140 with a minimum
grade of C+. (0-0; 3-3)

CMPT 200 Computing Projects (1-3
sem. hrs.)
In this course, students choose to work on a
particular computing project. Possible projects
include: a second or third computer language,
computer applications in the arts and sciences,
ethical issues, computer security, networking, or a
major software project. Enrolment is strictly
limited, and instructor’s consent is required.

NB: Not offered every year. See coordinator of
academic computing for permission to take this
course.
Prerequisite(s): CMPT 166. (3-3 or 3-3)

CMPT 211 Web Technologies I (3 sem.
hrs.)
An introduction to web application development
using current web technologies, best practices, and
standards. The modern web application
framework will be studied.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): CMPT 166. (3-3 or 3-3)

CMPT 231 Data Structures and
Algorithms (3 sem. hrs.)



                                                177
Basic organization of programs, optimizing
program structure, modularization, data structures,
search and sorting algorithms, handling large data
sets, analysis of algorithms.

Prerequisite(s): CMPT 150 and 166. (3-3 or 3-3)

CMPT 242 Computing Machine
Organization (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to assembly language, machine
architecture, low-level components of the
operating system, and other low-level issues.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): CMPT 140 or equivalent. (3-3 or
3-3)

CMPT 325 Computer Networking (3
sem. hrs.)
This course looks at network protocols, network
operating systems, and the construction and
maintenance of server sites.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): CMPT 150, 231 and MATH 123.
(3-0-3 or 3-0-3)

CMPT 330 Numerical Analysis (4 sem.
hrs.)
Numerical techniques for solving problems in
applied mathematics. Error analysis, roots of
equations, interpolation, numerical differentiation
and integration, ordinary differential equations,
matrix methods are considered.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: MATH 330.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 223, 250; CMPT 140; or
equivalent. (4-0 or 4-0)

CMPT 334 Principles of Operating
Systems (3 sem. hrs.)
Operating system and control software at a low
level, memory management, processor
management, storage management, and system
architecture are among the topics considered.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): CMPT 150 and 231. (3-0-3 or 3-
0-3)
CMPT 339 Introduction to Database
Management Systems (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to database management systems,
overviewing issues related to the design,
organization, and management of databases.
Topics include logical database design, entity
relationship (ER) models, and formal relational
query languages such as the Structured Query
Language (SQL).

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): CMPT 166, 231. (3-2 or 3-2)

CMPT 340 Discrete Structures and
Computing (3 sem. hrs.)
This is a second course in the topics of pure
mathematics, particularly those most commonly
used in the study of computing science and related
applications. It includes proof techniques, models
of computation, formal languages, analysis of
algorithms, trees and advanced general graph
theory with applications, finite state and automata
theory, encryption, and an elementary
introduction to mathematical structures such as
groups, rings, and fields.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: MATH 340.
Prerequisite(s): CMPT 150 or MATH 150. (0-0;
3-0)

CMPT 360 Comparative Programming
Languages (3 sem. hrs.)
The history, development, and design principles
for programming notations. The design and
internal operations of the major notational
categories are examined in detail. Students are
expected to become proficient in at least four
languages they have not previously learned,
typically chosen from historical, modern working,
and cutting edge languages and from among such
(non-exclusive) categories as Algol-descended,
functional, scripting, Web-based, modular,
application-specific, visual, and object oriented.
They will also learn how to select appropriate
programming notations for a given project.
Programming will be undertaken in at least three
OS environments.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.



                                               178
Prerequisite(s): CMPT 140, 166 and 231. (3-0-3
or 3-0-3)

CMPT 370 Computer Graphics (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course introduces the fundamentals of
computer graphics and principles of raster image
generation. Topics include: graphics primitives,
coordinate systems, transformations, rendering
techniques, and geometric modelling.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): CMPT 150, 166, 231; MATH
250. (3-3 or 3-3)

CMPT 375 Human-Computer
Interaction Design (3 sem. hrs.)
This course provides a general introduction to
interaction design from a human-computer
interaction perspective. Students will learn both
theoretical and practical concepts of human-
computer interaction which will help them
discover requirements, design/prototype and
evaluate interactive products with usability and
user experience (UX) goals. The course covers
human capabilities, design principles, prototyping
techniques, implementation, and evaluation
techniques for interactive products. Students will
apply what they learn from lectures to actual
challenges of interactive product design,
prototyping, implementation, and evaluation.

Pre‐requisite(s): CMPT 166, 231 (3,0)

CMPT 380 Artificial Intelligence (3
sem. hrs.)
Artificial Intelligence: knowledge representation,
logic programming, knowledge inference.
Application domains within the discipline of
Artificial Intelligence include logical and
probabilistic reasoning, natural language
understanding, vision and expert systems.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): CMPT 150, 166, 231

CMPT 382 - Machine Learning (3 sem.
hrs.)
An overview of core machine learning
technologies with motivating applications from a
variety of disciplines and real‐world data sets.
Students will learn how to implement, evaluate,
and improve machine learning algorithms. While
studying best practice in machine learning,
students are introduced to data mining and
statistical pattern recognition and learn how to
build automatic analytical models. Topics include
identification and extraction of useful features that
best represent available data, some of the most
important machine learning algorithms, and the
evaluation of algorithm performance.

Pre‐requisite(s): CMPT 166, 231; or instructor’s
consent.

CMPT 385 Introduction to Software
Engineering (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to the theory of designing and
carrying out large software projects. All stages of
the software engineering cycle, including
requirement analysis, design, implementation,
testing, and maintenance will be examined. The
student will complete a semester-long team based
project.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): CMPT 150, 166, and 231. (3-3;
0-0)

CMPT 386 Software Engineering II (3
sem. hrs.)
This course will study advanced techniques, tools,
and standards in software engineering. The
student will complete a semester-long team-based
project.

NB: Not offered every year.
Prerequisite(s): CMPT 385. (0-0; 1-6)

CMPT 387 Software Engineering
Project II (3 sem. hrs.)
The projects designed in CMPT 385/386 are
carried through to completion and tested. This
course permits students to do a second project.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): Grade of B- in CMPT 385 and
386, and the ability to work on a team. (0-0; 1-6)




                                                 179
CMPT 400 Directed Studies in
Computing Science (1-3 sem. hrs.)
Students are required to produce an outline of the
topic studied in consultation with the instructor. A
course of reading and/or experimentation is
pursued according to the approved outline.
Assessment may be via examination and/or a final
written report.

NB: This course with the appropriate choice of
topics can be used as a preparation for the senior
thesis (CMPT 410) or senior project (CMPT 420).
This course can only be taken with the consent of
the academic computing coordinator.
Prerequisite(s): Advanced standing in computing
science.

CMPT 401 Special Topics in
Computing Science (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of special topics or issues in computing
science that are not considered in-depth in other
courses.

NB: Not offered every year. Course may be
repeated.
Prerequisite(s): Advanced standing in computing
science or instructor’s permission.

CMPT 409 Thesis Preparation (1 sem.
hr.)
Students are required to choose a topic for their
senior thesis (CMPT 410 or 411) in consultation
with an instructor. Selected readings and
references pertinent to the topic are assigned. A
final written report is presented, consisting of a
detailed thesis proposal and a literature review.

NB: A student is allowed credit for only one of
CMPT 409 or 419.
Prerequisite(s): Advanced standing in computing
science or instructor’s consent.

CMPT 410 Senior Thesis (2 sem. hrs.)
Students research a chosen area of computing
science and provide a final written report.

NB: Normally 2 sem. hrs. are assigned unless
prior arrangement is made with the department
chair and registrar.
Prerequisite(s): CMPT 409, a related directed
study in preparation, or instructor’s consent.
CMPT 411 Senior Thesis (3 sem. hrs.)
Students research a chosen area of computing
science and provide a final written report.

NB: Normally 2 sem. hrs. are assigned unless
prior arrangement is made with the department
chair and registrar.
Prerequisite(s): CMPT 409, a related directed
study in preparation, or instructor’s consent.

CMPT 419 Project Preparation (1 sem.
hr.)
Students are required to choose a topic for their
senior group project (CMPT 420 or 421) in
consultation with the instructor. Selected readings
and references pertinent to the topic are assigned.
A final written report (software requirements
document) is produced giving a detailed
specification of the proposed software project.

NB: A student is allowed credit for only one of
CMPT 409 or 419.
Prerequisite(s): Advanced standing in computing
science or instructor’s consent.

CMPT 420 Special Topics - Senior
Collaborative Project (1-6 sem. hrs.)
Students work on a major collaborative software
project in a chosen area of computing science and
provide a final report and presentation. At least
two, and normally not more than five people,
work as a team to design, code, debug, test, and
document the software.

Prerequisite(s): CMPT 419, a related directed
study, or instructor’s consent

CMPT 421 Special Topics - Senior
Collaborative Project (1–6 sem. hrs.)
Students work on a major collaborative software
project in a chosen area of computing science and
provide a final report and presentation. At least
two, and normally not more than five people,
work as a team to design, code, debug, test, and
document the software.

NB: The choice of CMPT 420 or both 420 and
421 depends on the instructor’s assessment of the
proposed project’s size and complexity.
Prerequisite(s): CMPT 420.



                                                180
CMPT 461 Immersive Computing (3
sem.hr.)
This course introduces theories, techniques, and
applications of immersive computing and related
technologies. Students will be introduced to
advanced 3D modeling/animation and virtual
environment building techniques. In a semester-
long project, students will develop their projects
using an immersive framework to design, build,
and evaluate immersive virtual environments.

Prerequisite(s): CMPT 166 and 231 (3-0)

CMPT 470 Introduction to
Bioinformatics (3 sem. hrs.)
An overview of the interdisciplinary science of
genomics, proteomics, and bioinformatics which
applies the tools of information technology
(computer hardware and software) to analyze
biological data such as gene or protein sequences.
This course examines the theory of bioinformatics
as well as its practical application to biological
problems using approaches such as BLAST
searches, phylogenetics, and protein structure
function analysis.

Cross-listed: BIOT 470 or BIOL 470
Prerequisite(s): CMPT 150, 166, and 231.



Co-operative
Education
COOP 110, 210, 310, 410, 420 Co-op
Work Terms (0 sem. hrs.)
These are the course numbers for co-op work
terms. The appropriate semester coincides with
the first digit; i.e., 110 would be the first semester
of work experience for students in the co-op
program. Co-op terms provide an opportunity to
integrate theory and practice. Requirements
include completion of a work term report.

NB: Non-credit, Pass/Fail course.
Counselling
Psychology,
Graduate Courses
NB: CPSY 502-695 are graduate courses. For further
information about when courses are offered, see the School of
Graduate Studies section or contact the Counselling
Psychology Graduate Program.

CPSY 490 Basic Counselling Skills (3
sem. hrs.)
This course introduces the art of counselling skills
as a part of the growth process. Basic helping
skills will be explored from Hill’s three stage
model of helping; exploration, insight and action.
Students will be provided a framework from
which they can approach the counselling process.
They will also learn specific skills to use in
sessions with clients to help their clients explore,
gain insight, and make changes in their lives.
Students will also begin to explore the process of
coming to think of themselves as a helper.

CPSY 502 Research Design (3 sem.
hrs.)
This seminar-style course provides training in
quantitative, qualitative, and mixed-methods and
program evaluation designs for conducting
empirical research in counselling psychology. It is
an advanced level course that assumes basic
undergraduate competence in statistics and social
scientific research. Students will be exposed to the
methods and stages of basic research, applied
research, and program evaluation. An emphasis is
placed on training students to reflect critically on
the methods themselves - their philosophical
underpinnings, promises, and limitations. Ethical
and cultural considerations in research are also
addressed. This course is designed to be
interactive and dialogical, and entails a mix of
lectures, discussion and classroom activities.

CPSY 504 Evaluating Statistics and
Research (3 sem. hrs.)
Prepares students to evaluate and critique statistics
and research methods in counselling psychology,
including learning about the use and misuse of



                                                        181
basic quantitative and qualitative analytical
techniques in counselling-related research and in
program evaluation. The course also provides an
introduction to ethical issues in research, and
conducting critical reviews of literature.

NB: Students must also register for the
mandatory weekly Lab (L1) sessions (0 s.h.).
Credit will not be granted for CPSY 504 if CPSY
502/517 have already been taken.

CPSY 506 Theories of Counselling (3
sem. hrs.)
Critical evaluation of major theories of counselling
and psychotherapy in terms of their assumptions,
research support, and applications. Such issues as
cultural diversity, gender differences, and human
development are discussed. Students are
introduced to the process of integrating theories
as they develop their own framework for
counselling practice.

CPSY 508 Family and Community
Systems (3 sem. hrs.)
This course provides a theoretical and applied
introduction to systems theory with a focus on
illustrating interventions targeting the wellbeing of
children and youth. This course will provide an
overview of family systems theory and therapy
with an emphasis on clinical skill building and
conceptualization within a family life cycle and
lifespan human development focus. Attention will
be paid to person-environment interactions within
families and communities, including ways in which
societal issues impact functioning of the
individual, family, and community. This course
will highlight distinctions between traditional 1:1
intervention paradigms and those of family and
community psychology with the aim of expanding
the repertoire of skills and approaches available to
future professionals. Consideration of issues
related to diversity, power, and privilege as they
relate to age, gender, sexual orientation,
health/ability, culture and ethnicity,
socioeconomic status, and spirituality and religion
will be encouraged throughout the course.

CPSY 510 Group Counselling (3 sem.
hrs.)
An overview of meta-theory and skill applications
necessary for leadership of effective group
processes. Participants develop and demonstrate
introductory group facilitation skills. In addition
to an overview of group dynamics, the course
includes an introduction to the major models of
group counselling and therapy, and a laboratory
section to facilitate the development of group
counselling skills and competencies. Ethics and
cultural differences are also addressed.

Prerequisite(s): CPSY 590.

CPSY 515 Career Counselling (3 sem.
hrs.)
An overview of some of the most useful major
career development theories and resources. A
wide range of issues such as gender, culture,
socioeconomic status, age, and mental health
concerns are also addressed, as these issues
impinge upon career. Students are introduced to a
variety of career counselling and implementation
strategies within the current labour market. In
addition, each student completes a set of career
assessment instruments, and interprets them for a
class partner.

CPSY 517 Advanced Data Analysis (3
sem. hrs.)
The course covers advanced quantitative and
qualitative data analysis strategies, such as:
multiple regression, different models of analysis of
variance, factor analysis, content analysis and
coding across several qualitative methods (e.g.,
grounded theory, phenomenology, ECIT, etc.).
An additional focus of the course will be on
integrating quantitative and qualitative data
analysis methods (mixed methods research).

Prerequisite(s): CPSY 502, plus undergraduate
course in statistics.

CPSY 518 Research Seminar (3 sem.
hrs.)
Helps to orient students to several significant
research areas in counselling and psychology as
well as issues critical to the successful completion
of thesis research. Students present their research
ideas in class and develop a research proposal.

Prerequisite(s): CPSY 502, 517, and permission.




                                                 182
CPSY 523, 524, 525 Foundations of
Counselling and Psychology I, II, III
(1, 1, 1 sem. hrs.)
Provides a critical introduction to scholarly
literature on cultural, philosophical, historical, and
theological perspectives on counselling,
psychotherapy, and research. Students explore
their personal worldviews in relationship to
professional, biblical, and scientific standards and
begin to formulate their approaches to serving in
socially, spiritually, and culturally diverse
professional settings. The course is taught and is
to be attended sequentially over three terms. Each
successive 1 s.h. seminar builds on the previous in
a focused accompaniment of students’ personal
and professional growth and development.

CPSY 590 Advanced Counselling Skills
(3 sem. hrs.)
Students are engaged in this course using a
laboratory format. Classes include conceptual
presentations on advanced counselling skills, in-
class demonstrations, and triad exercises designed
to facilitate counsellor development. Students also
analyze and transcribe portions of video
recordings of sessions. Professional roles,
functions, preparation standards, ethics, and
cultural differences are addressed.

Prerequisite(s): Undergraduate psychology
course covering basic empathy and
communication skills.
Recommended: CPSY 490.

CPSY 591, 592 Practicum I & II (3, 3
sem. hrs.)
Individual and group clinical practice with
intensive supervision totaling more than 100
hours over eight months. The course includes an
average of one-hour of individual supervision and
1.5 hours of group supervision each week.
Students must complete a minimum of 40 direct
client hours, of which at least 10 hours must be
group work. Any incomplete hours must be made
up during internship placements. The practicum
course is designed to be completed in teams of
five students and a faculty supervisor. Practicum I
and II must be completed consecutively.

NB: Limited to CPSY students only.
Prerequisite/Co-requisite(s): CPSY 506, 510,
590.

CPSY 603, 604 Thesis I & II (3, 3 sem.
hrs.)
Students are required to complete an MA thesis
that passes an examiner external to the University
with expertise in the area of the thesis. The thesis
must be defended orally before an examination
committee. Students may complete one of three
types of theses. Students who intend to pursue a
Ph.D. degree are advised to complete an empirical
thesis (1 or 2):
  1. Quantitative Research – Typically
       involves systematic, experimental, or
       correlational investigation, and employs
       quantitative analysis and inferential
       statistics.
  2. Qualitative or Mixed Methods Research
       – Includes a variety of qualitative methods
       in collecting and analyzing data. Typically,
       the focus is on phenomenological
       experience.
  3. Theoretical-Integrative Thesis –
       Requires a critical review of relevant
       research and the development of an
       integrative model that attempts to
       encompass available data and competing
       theories.
Students normally choose their area of research
with help from the thesis coordinator and other
faculty after their second semester in the program.
Visit the program’s website at twu.ca/cpsy to view
some thesis topics.

Prerequisite(s): CPSY 502, 517, 518, and
permission.

CPSY 605 Thesis & Program
Continuation (0 sem. hrs.)
Students who are completing a thesis are required
to register for continuation for every term
subsequent to CPSY 604 until the thesis has been
deposited, in addition to any other courses that are
being taken. In addition, all students (including
non-thesis track) are required to enroll in Program
Continuation in every term, fall, spring, and
summer, during which they are not registered for
any other courses in the program.

Prerequisite(s): CPSY student.


                                                183
CPSY 607 Psychopathology (3 sem.
hrs.)
An overview of current conceptualization,
diagnosis, etiology, and treatment of mental
disorders. Historical, biological, sociological,
neuropsychological, cultural, and psychological
theories and processes involved in the ongoing
discourse around psychopathology are examined
through the use of historical and current research
articles, the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders Fifth Edition (DSM-5), class
discussions, case studies in print and media, and
guest presentations. In addition, “evidence-based”
treatments of the more commonly understood
mental illnesses, and the social justice and ethical
issues involved in the treatment of emotional
distress are a focus of discussion.

Prerequisite(s): CPSY 591

CPSY 609 Seminar on Ethical
Integration (3 sem. hrs.)
This course explores the laws and ethics that guide
practitioners in the field of counselling
psychology. Students will be expected to grapple
with complex issues that arise when confronted
with ethical dilemmas in a variety of professional
contexts, including clinical practice, research,
teaching, consultation, and supervision. Since
ethical and legal principles are not the only
standards by which counsellors make decisions,
students will be challenged to integrate these
guidelines with their personal values and spiritual
beliefs, as well as clinical judgments and
multicultural considerations. This is a “capstone”
course, which enables students to demonstrate
their accumulated learning throughout the
Counselling Psychology program.

Prerequisite(s): CPSY 505, 691, and 45 sem. hrs.
earned in the CPSY program.

CPSY 613 Crisis Counselling (3 sem.
hrs.)
Focuses on the theory, interventions, and research
relevant to providing crisis management services
with people experiencing situational, transitional,
and cultural/socio-structural crises. The course,
based on a psycho-socio-cultural perspective,
explores the interaction of crises with situational
factors, developmental status, family dynamics,
ethnicity, and gender. The course involves
exploration of interactions between crises and
situational factors, developmental levels, family
dynamics, ethnicity, and gender, as well as both
didactic and skills development components.

Prerequisite(s): CPSY 590, 591; preference given
to second-year CPSY students.

CPSY 615 Child and Youth
Counselling (3 sem. hrs.)
This course is designed to provide students with a
foundation in the theory and practice of
assessment, diagnosis, and interventions with
children and youth. Consideration of presenting
problems will be informed by understanding of
lifespan human development. Both individual- and
systems-focused interventions will be examined.
An advocacy focus on culturally competent
perspectives, collaboration with larger systems,
and the impact of sociocultural issues on children
and families is maintained. Expressive and
structured counselling modalities are considered as
they relate to research evidence, and the need to
tailor interventions to individual clients’ needs.
Discussion of faith-informed perspectives and
legal-ethical principles as they inform practice with
children and families will be encouraged.

Prerequisite(s): CPSY 508, 590, 591, 592;
minimum completion of 24 sem. hrs. in CPSY
program.

CPSY 616 Systemic Therapy with
Couples, Families and Aging Adults (3
sem. hrs.)
This course is designed to provide students with a
foundation in the theory and practice of
assessment, diagnosis, and interventions with
couples and older adults. Consideration of
presenting problems will be informed by
understanding of lifespan human development.
Both individual- and systems-focused
interventions will be examined. An advocacy focus
on culturally competent perspectives,
collaboration with larger systems, and the impact
of sociocultural issues on couples and older adults
is maintained. A clinical focus on relational
violence will be used to integrate various
professional priorities. Multiple clinical modalities
are considered as they relate to research evidence


                                                 184
and the need to tailor interventions to individual
clients’ needs. Discussion of faith-informed
perspectives and legal-ethical principles as they
inform practice with couples and older adults will
be encouraged.

Prerequisite(s): CPSY 508, 590, 591, 592;
minimum completion of 24 sem. hrs. in CPSY
program.

CPSY 622 Basic Principles and
Applications of Assessment (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course covers basic principles of
psychometrics as applied to the construction and
validation of formal tests as well as an
introduction to the administration and
interpretation of assessment instruments.
Addresses ethical standards of test usage,
multicultural assessment, and assessment
paradigms. Students learn how to select
appropriate tests for specific purposes, to conduct
assessment interviews, and to synthesize
qualitative and quantitative assessment
information in normal personality assessment.
Overviews ethical, legal, and cultural facets of
psychological assessment. Students are introduced
to selected cognitive, personality/behavioural
assessment instruments and trained in
administration, interpretation, report writing and
assessment feedback through a mandatory course
lab experience. Multicultural and multilingual
issues in assessment are addressed.

NB: Students must also register for the
mandatory weekly Lab (L1) sessions (0 s.h.) in
order to engage in the practical application of
assessment skills.
Prerequisite(s): CPSY 504 or 517; CPSY 592 and
607.

CPSY 624 Counselling in Diverse
Educational Settings (3 sem. hrs.)
Examines the foundations of counselling in
various educational settings, including elementary
and secondary schools, and college counselling,
and explores relevant issues and challenges
relating to diverse learners, community contexts,
and the changing ecology of education in Canada.
This skill-building course emphasizes legal and
ethical standards of practice and the importance
of developing a comprehensive counselling
program for students. The class sessions are
interactive and experiential, providing
opportunities for critical discussion, site visits, and
professional consultation.

NB: Not offered every year.

CPSY 630 Advanced Topics in Legal
and Ethical Issues (3 sem. hrs.)
Examination of paradigms and developments in
professional ethics. This course builds on the
professional ethics training infused throughout the
curriculum, including topics in legal issues, family
therapy, professional psychology and counselling,
consultation, and client advocacy. International
developments are addressed in professional
mobility and regulations, competency standards,
and multicultural contexts of professional
standards. Emphasis is placed on fostering student
proficiency in navigating licensure requirements
and fostering accountability in professional
practice.

NB: Not offered every year.

CPSY 633 Addictions Counselling (3
sem. hrs.)
Current theories and treatments of addictive
behaviour are reviewed, and the impact of
addiction upon family systems and other
relationships is particularly stressed. Content
includes reviews of the effects of mood-altering
substances on the body, and therapy modalities
for both chemical and process addictions. Co-
occurring disorders are addressed, and students
are introduced to agency settings where addiction
treatment is offered.

NB: Preference given to second-year CPSY
students.

CPSY 634 Trauma and Sexual Abuse
Counselling (3 sem. hrs.)
A survey of recently developed assessments and
treatments for psychological trauma and
dissociation, especially sequelae of domestic
violence, sexual abuse and sexual assault. Trauma-
related disorders include: PTSD, complex PTSD,
dissociative disorders, somatoform disorders,
eating disorders, and substance abuse disorders.


                                                   185
The neuroscience of psychological trauma, along
with relational, cultural, and sociological
influences, is also discussed.

NB: Preference given to second-year CPSY
students. Not offered every year.

CPSY 640 M.A. Non-thesis
Comprehensive Exam (MANTCE) (3
sem. hrs.)
Students are expected to successfully formulate
and articulate informed and integrative judgments
about a range of ethical and professional practice
questions encountered in counselling psychology.

Prerequisite(s): Completion of at least 51 sem.
hrs. in the CPSY program including CPSY 609
and 691, and permission of the program director.

CPSY 650, 651 Directed Study I, II (1-3
sem. hrs)
For students who want to explore academic areas
of special interest not provided in the existing
curriculum. These areas must be related to the
discipline of Counselling Psychology. Students
normally take a maximum of one directed study
per semester. A maximum of three directed study
courses may be applied to completion of the M.A.
degree.

Prerequisite(s): Permission of Program Director
and instructor.

CPSY 655 Advanced Special Topics in
Counselling Psychology (1 sem. hrs.)
An in-depth examination of special topics or
issues in counselling psychology.

NB: Not offered every year.

CPSY 660 Multicultural Counselling (3
sem. hrs.)
Exploration of topics such as the significance of
culture, migration, social class, race, language, and
ethnicity for human health and well-being. This
course builds on multicultural counselling and
diversity awareness principles infused throughout
the master’s program. Both theory and
interventions for addressing bicultural identity
development, advocacy, acculturation stress, and
barriers to help-seeking and counselling
effectiveness. Critical appropriation of
professional literature, competencies models, and
intersections with other aspects of diversity are
emphasized.

NB: Preference given to second-year CPSY
students. Not offered every year.

CPSY 670 Psychopharmacology (3
sem. hrs.)
An introduction to principles of pharmacology
and the use of pharmacological agents for the
treatment of psychological and neuropsychiatric
conditions. Reviews basic physiological and
biological aspects of psychopathology. The course
does not prepare a student for the practice of
pharmacology. However, it does enhance the
student's ability to communicate more effectively
with physicians and assist them in participating in
multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary settings.

NB: Not offered every year.
Prerequisite(s): CPSY 607.

CPSY 691, 692 Supervised Internship I,
II (3, 3 sem. hrs.)
Students are required to complete a minimum of
600 hours of approved internship, 240 hours of
which are in direct service with clients. This
provides students with opportunities to refine
basic assessment and counselling skills as well as
develop specialized areas of interest. The
internship is regarded as a summative clinical
experience leading to the master’s degree in
counselling psychology. The primary objective of
the internship is to provide an opportunity for
integration and practice of knowledge and skills in
a professional counselling setting. In addition to
the on-site requirements for internship, a reading
list and a bi-weekly seminar are required to ensure
that students are familiar with professional,
ethical, and legal issues. Participation in the
seminar counts towards the 600 hours required
for internship.

Prerequisite(s): CPSY 591, 592.

CPSY 695 Internship Continuation (0
sem. hrs.)



                                               186
Students are required to register for Internship
Continuation for every term subsequent to CPSY
691 until 120 direct clinical hours have been
completed during internship and have been
documented. In addition, students are required to
register for Internship Continuation for every
term subsequent to CPSY 692 until all required
direct clinical hours for the entire program have
been completed and documented.

Prerequisite(s): CPSY 691.


DATA 100 Elementary Data Science (3
sem. hrs.)
Introduces basic concepts of data science,
focusing on the practical knowledge and skills of
digital analytics, with specific tools like Excel and
SQL. Students will learn how to collect and clean
data sets, how to analyze and visualize them, how
to interpret them, and how to make decisions
based on their analyses. Hands-on practice with
digital analytics on real-world data will equip
students to use their digital skills in political
polling, psychological diagnoses, urban planning,
and many other applications.

Prerequisite(s): None (3-0)



Economics
ECON 110 Business in the Global
Market (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to global business practices. A
survey of governmental and corporate practices of
major economic systems—Japan, Europe, Pacific
Rim, Rhine countries, etc. Different cultural
meanings of concepts such as globalization, world
class, nimble organizations, empowerment, and
teams are explored. The class provides the
students with experiential as well as classroom
learning to provide a better grasp of the
differences in cultures and the adaptation of
business concepts.

NB: Offered when available in summer with
overseas travel component. Open to business and
nonbusiness majors.
Cross-listed: BUSI 110.
Prerequisite(s): Permission of the instructor.

ECON 176 Introduction to Business
Research and Decision Making (3 sem.
hrs.)
Business research allows managers to make
effective decisions in today’s organizations. This
course will assist students in understanding the
research questions to ask in business and will
prepare them to analyze and present the data they
gather. Students will gain extensive skills in the use
of spreadsheets and in spreadsheet modeling – an
indispensable tool in the business world.

Cross-listed: BUSI 176.
Prerequisite(s): none. (3-0; 3-0)

ECON 201 Principles of
Microeconomics (3, 3 sem. hrs.)
A fundamental understanding of how economists
view the world, how people make decisions, and
how people interact with one another. Basic
economic analysis of consumer behaviour, firms’
production behaviour, and market equilibrium.
Graphical analysis.

Prerequisite(s): Second year standing or
instructor’s consent; knowledge of spreadsheet
software. (3-0; 3-0)

ECON 202 Principles of
Macroeconomics (3 sem. hrs.)
Basic lessons of macroeconomics, where the
economic growth and economic fluctuations are
studied. Issues such as GDP, CPI are discussed.
Long-run trend and causes of economic growth
rate, unemployment rate and inflation rate are
examined. This course also covers short-run
fluctuations of an economy around the long-run
trend; government responses to the short-run
fluctuation of an economy, namely monetary and
fiscal policy; and exchange rate, current account,
and capital flights in an open economy context.

Prerequisite(s): ECON 201. (3-0; 3-0)

ECON 230 Introduction to
International Development (3 sem.
hrs.)



                                                  187
This course provides an introduction to the field
of international development through an overview
of the many issues and challenges relating to
economic disparity among people of various
nations. Students engage in the exploration of
responses to these situations. The course is open
to students from all disciplines.

Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0 or 3-0)

ECON 275 Business Statistics (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course considers statistical tools and
knowledge necessary for success in business
endeavours. Topics include descriptive statistics,
probability (with discrete and continuous
distributions), hypothesis testing, regression, and
ANOVA. Students learn theory behind the
methods, and primarily use spreadsheets as tools
for solving advanced problems.

Cross-listed: BUSI 275.
Prerequisite(s): BUSI/ECON 176; or
instructor’s consent. (3-0; 3-0)

ECON 301 Managerial Economics (3
sem. hrs.)
The study of the main principles and techniques
of price theory and its practical applications.
Major topics include: price, production and
distribution theories, the theory of the firm, risk
and uncertainty, game theory, and transaction
costs. New developments and/or approaches to
microeconomics analysis.
Cross-listed: BUSI 301.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 202. (3-0; 3-0)

ECON 302 Intermediate
Macroeconomics for Managerial
Decision-Making (3 sem. hrs.)
The main concepts and methods usually used by
economists to explain macroeconomic variables:
inflation, unemployment, consumption,
investment, foreign trade, monetary and fiscal
policies, and economic growth. Classical and
Keynesian macroeconomic models are studied and
compared in terms of economic statics and
dynamics.

NB: May not be offered every year.
Cross-listed: BUSI 302.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 202. (0-0; 3-0)

ECON 304 Financial Markets and
Institutions (3 sem. hrs.)
The study of the role of money, monetary policy,
and financial institutions in the Canadian and U.S.
economies. Major topics include interest rates,
decision-makers, financial asset prices, risk
management, banking and financial institutions,
and central banks and monetary policy.

Cross-listed: BUSI 304.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 202. (3-0 or 3-0)

ECON 306 History of Economic
Thought (3 sem. hrs.)
An investigation of the overlap of economic
history and economic thought all the way from
ancient Greeks philosophers, through medieval
scholastics, to mercantilist businessmen, to Adam
Smith and the classical economists of the
Industrial Revolution, to macroeconomists
emerging from the Great Depression, and into the
Twenty-First century. Students examine the main
economic questions and themes of these various
periods including: What is the good life? Is
business moral? How do selfish individuals
promote societal good through markets? What is
the proper role and scope of government? As an
inquiry-based course, students will have
considerable latitude to examine topics of
particular interest to them in more detail.

NB: May not be offered every year.
Cross-listed: HIST 306.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 202. (3-0 or 3-0)

ECON 308 Canadian Economic Policy
and Problems (3 sem. hrs.)
The identification and analysis of various kinds of
Canadian economic problems: regional and
provincial problems, agricultural and natural
resource policies, unemployment, inflation,
foreign/ international policies, poverty, economic
effects of population growth, decline,
immigration/ emigration, labour unrest, social
problems, and industrialization strategies.
Emphasis is on current and pertinent economic
problems.

NB: May not be offered every year.


                                                188
Prerequisite(s): ECON 202. (3-0 or 3-0)

ECON 311 Global Issues in Business
(3 sem. hrs.)
The focus of this course is on understanding the
institutions (e.g. political, economic, and cultural)
and the resources (e.g. natural, human,
technology, and innovation) that are present
within home and host countries that influence the
decision making of business owners and managers
as they consider going global with their product or
service. Discussions centre around understanding
culture, ethics, and global sustainability that relate
to being a responsible and ethical global citizen.

NB: May not be offered every year.
Cross-listed: BUSI 311.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 202. (3-0; 3-0)

ECON 317 Investment Theory (3 sem.
hrs.)
A study of financial markets and the various
instruments traded on those markets, to include
how these instruments are priced. Other topics
explored include: portfolio theory, market
efficiency and equilibrium, asset analysis, asset
allocation, and portfolio management.

Cross-listed: BUSI 317.
Prerequisite(s): BUSI 342. (3-0 or 3-0)

ECON 330 Theory and Practice of
Development (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of major theories or models of economic
development and evaluation of practices and
approaches to economic development by studying
various cases from several different countries.
Theories and practices of development are
examined from a Christian perspective, with
consideration of the influence of the human
factor.

Prerequisite(s): ECON 230. (3-0 or 3-0)

ECON 354 Geography of the World
Economy (3 sem. hrs.)
This course investigates the changing geographical
patterns of global economic activity and the
processes influencing the organization of
economic space. It focuses on the spatial patterns
of production and manufacturing; the distribution
of goods and services; and the role of
multinationals, global marketing strategies and
outsourcing. It also investigates issues and
challenges from global to local economies,
including: population growth and development,
poverty and unemployment, and environmental
sustainability.

NB: Offered every other year.
Cross-listed: GENV 354.
Prerequisite(s): GENV 111. (0-0; 3-0)

ECON 357 Environmental Economics
and Policy (3 sem. hrs.)
This course introduces the main concepts in
environmental economics and applies them to
public policy analysis. Students will learn about
markets, prices and the role of information in the
economy, and will then learn about market failures
that specifically affect the environment. The
second half of the course introduces the key
techniques in public policy analysis (an inherently
interdisciplinary undertaking), including the
process of developing, implementing, and
assessing public policy.

Cross-listed: GENV 357
Prerequisite(s): Third year standing. (3-0 or 3-0)

ECON 411 Business in the Global
Market (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to global business practices while
on a travel study. A survey of governmental and
corporate practices of major economic systems
throughout the world. Different cultural meanings
of concepts such as globalization, world class,
nimble organizations, empowerment, and teams
are explored. The class provides the students with
experiential as well as classroom learning to
provide a better grasp of the differences in
cultures and the adaptation of the concepts.

NB: Offered when available in summer with
overseas travel component.
Cross-listed: BUSI 411.
Prerequisite(s): Permission of the instructor. (3-0
or 3-0)

ECON 412 International Economic
Competitiveness (3 sem. hrs.)


                                               189
This course studies the competitiveness of
companies in different countries and regions given
ever-changing economic conditions and policies.
The course reviews factors that determine
competitive advantage including: factor
conditions, demand conditions, supporting
industries, firm strategy, and government policy.

NB: May not be offered every year.
Cross-listed: BUSI 412.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 202; BUSI 311; third
year standing. (3-0 or 3-0)

ECON 480 Leadership in the Global
Context (3 sem. hrs.)
This course addresses issues faced by leaders
working in settings throughout the globe. Students
examine approaches to leadership and develop an
understanding of the important role culture plays
in multicultural organizational contexts. Cross-
cultural communication, cultural intelligence, and
individual and organizational behaviour in various
cultures is studied. Particular attention is given to
the servant leadership approach and how to
develop the mindset of an effective leader in both
non-governmental and for-profit organizational
contexts.

Cross-listed: BUSI 480.
Prerequisite(s): Third year standing. (3-0 or 3-0)



Education
Preference for entry into 200 level education courses is given
to declared education program students, concentrations, and
minors. Preference for entry into 300 and 400 level
education courses is given to students who have been
officially accepted into the education Program. To take a
300 or 400 level education course, students must have a
minimum cumulative GPA of 2.5.

EDUC 211 Psychological Foundations
of Teaching and Learning (3 sem. hrs.)
An evaluation of psychological theories and
research relating to learning and teaching, with a
focus on developmental stages, learning theories,
motivation, classroom management, evaluation,
inter- and intra-individual differences, and needs
of exceptional children.
Cross-listed: PSYC 214
Prerequisite(s): Student must have completed at
least one semester. (3-0; 3-0).

EDUC 222 Principles of Teaching and
Learning (3 sem. hrs.)
This course covers principles of teaching and
learning in a classroom setting. Topics include: the
nature and purpose of schooling; models of
teaching and learning; pedagogy and learning
styles; classroom planning and management; and
current issues of education concerning inclusion
and diversity. This course is guided by the
assumption that one’s faith impacts one’s actions
in meaningful and thoughtful ways.

NB: Students are involved in 12 hours of
classroom observation.
Prerequisite(s): EDUC 211; Second year
standing. (3-0; 3-0)

EDUC 233 Foundations of Education
(3 sem. hrs.)
A critical consideration of selected educational
thinkers and the establishment and development
of public schooling in British Columbia. An
evaluation of prominent theoretical approaches to
education and how they are rooted in certain
worldview perspectives. An examination of
important issues in education such as the nature
and aims of schooling, views of knowledge and
the curriculum, and moral and values education.
This course centres on the development of a
personal theory of education.

Co-requisite(s): EDUC 211.
Prerequisite(s): Second year standing. (3-0; 3-0)

EDUC 268 Introduction to Teaching
English as a Second Language (3 sem.
hrs.)
This introductory course investigates the English
language itself (what we teach), the various ELT
(English Language Teaching) methodologies and
classroom techniques (how we teach), and the
participants in the teaching/learning process (the
who of ELT).

Cross-listed: LING 268.
Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0 or 3-0)



                                                190
EDUC 302 Initial Classroom
Experience (1 sem. hr.)
These initial classroom experiences provide
students with meaningful educational experiences
in schools and classrooms. Students relate their
studies in the university classroom to school
settings. They become more confident in being in
the classroom and interacting with students and
teachers, and carry out activities that prepare them
for more advanced practica. Pre-service teachers
are involved in 25 hours of classroom experience,
normally 2.5 hours a week for 10 weeks (or 30
hours of classroom experience if the course
happens for one to two weeks during the month
of May. Requests for May practica are processed
through the Dean’s office.).

NB: Pass/Fail course. Must be enrolled in a third
year EDUC class.
Co-requisite(s): Enrolment in a third year
EDUC course.
Prerequisite(s): EDUC 211, 222, 233; 6 credit
hours of 100 level ENGL; confirmation into the
School of Education; and a minimum 2.70 GPA.

EDUC 303 Initial Classroom
Experience (1 sem. hr.)
These initial classroom experiences provide
students with meaningful educational experiences
in schools and classrooms. Students relate their
studies in the university classroom to school
settings. They become more confident in being in
the classroom and interacting with students and
teachers, and carry out activities that prepare them
for more advanced practica. Pre-service teachers
are involved in 25 hours of classroom experience,
normally 2.5 hours a week for 10 weeks (or 30
hours of classroom experience if the course
happens for one to two weeks during the month
of May. Requests for May practica are processed
through the Dean’s office.)

NB: Pass/Fail course. Must be enrolled in a third
year EDUC class.
Co-requisite(s): Enrolment in a third year
EDUC course.
Prerequisite(s): EDUC 302, and a minimum 2.70
GPA.

EDUC 310 The Exceptional Child in
the Regular Classroom (3 sem. hrs.)
The study of the identification, etiology, diagnosis,
and prognosis of students with exceptional
learning needs such as learning and physical
disabilities, visual and auditory impairments,
behaviour disorders, intellectual delay, and
giftedness as related to classroom experiences in
schools.

Cross-listed: PSYC 310.
Prerequisite(s): EDUC 211 or PSYC 214; third
year standing. (3-0 or 3-0)

EDUC 321 Curriculum Planning for
the Classroom (3 sem. hrs.)
The theory and process of curriculum
development based on a faith-informed
understanding, with diverse applications of
classroom curriculum planning. Topics include
definitions and aims of the curriculum; justifying
the curriculum; current approaches to curriculum
development; knowledge and curriculum content;
curriculum integration; planning, constructing and
implementing classroom units; evaluating and
using curriculum resources; curriculum planning,
implementation and evaluation of successful
teacher planning methods.

Prerequisite(s): EDUC 211, 222, 233; 6 semester
hours of 100 level ENGL; confirmation into the
School of Education; and a minimum 2.70 GPA.
(3-0; 3-0)

EDUC 345 Gender and Education (3
sem. hrs.)
An introduction to gender and education as a
method of inquiry into the role of education in
society. In particular, the course explores the
relationship of gender and education in the
context of formalized schooling, both in Canada
and around the world. By focusing on gender, this
course considers the experiences of people in their
roles of students, classmates, teachers, and in
positions of leadership. For people of faith,
students will become familiar with ‘gender’ as a
sociological variable (i.e., cultural) in schooling by
exploring current sociological theories of
education and current lived realities of girls and
boys in schools.

Cross-listed: GNDR 345.
Prerequisite(s): Minimum 60 semester hours.


                                                  191
EDUC 350 Elementary School Human
Kinetics (3 sem. hrs.)
Teaching methodology and curriculum for
physical education instruction. An introduction to
lesson planning, active living, movement skills,
and safety, fair play, and leadership as it applies to
students in a school physical education program.

Cross-listed: HKIN 350.
Prerequisite(s): Third year standing or
instructor’s consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

EDUC 353 Environmental Education:
Curriculum and Pedagogy (3 sem.
hrs.)
This introductory environmental education
explores environmental learning approaches to be
used in schools and field-based/outdoor
educational settings. Using environmental learning
approaches in class and in the field, students will
develop reflexive and inquisitive thinking along
with problem-solving approaches, develop
communication, team building, and collaborative
working skills, and develop skills and knowledge
of forest, flora, and fauna. The course will
examine environmental issues and learning
approached from a local perspective and with
respect to First Peoples Principles of Learning.
(3-0; 3-0)

EDUC 365 Social Issues in Education
(3 sem. hrs.)
This course is an introduction to the sociology of
education as an analysis of the role of education in
society. In particular, the course will explore
societal trends affecting the institutions and
practices of education; interpretative paradigms
and related research studies; group dynamics in
education; religious, social, and economic factors
and issues in Canadian education.

Prerequisite(s): Minimum 60 semester hours.
(3-0 or 3-0)

EDUC 373 Media and Technologies in
Education (3 sem. hrs.)
An overview of educational media and
technologies in the classroom. Students will learn
to apply technological skills for teaching and
learning. They will engage this course as
collaborators, content creators, and tinkerers,
working together for a discerning praxis of
educational media and technologies.

Prerequisite(s): Minimum 60 semester hours.

EDUC 401 Assessment and Evaluation
for Learning (3 sem. hr.)
A consideration of models of student assessment
that contribute to effective and meaningful
student learning. Assessment of learning, for
learning, and as learning. Topics include
underlying perspectives on student assessment,
including faith informed perspectives; linking
assessment to curriculum and learning, grading
practices and guidelines, sampling student
performance, keeping records, communicating the
results of assessment, interpreting, and using the
results of large-scale testing.

Co-requisite(s): EDUC 402.
Prerequisite(s): EDUC 321; minimum 90
semester hours; and a minimum 2.70 GPA. (3-0;
0-0)

EDUC 402 Initial Classroom
Experience (1 sem. hr.)
These initial classroom experiences provide
students with meaningful educational experiences
in schools and classrooms. Students relate their
studies in the university classroom to school
settings. Throughout the course and school visits,
students become more confident in being in the
classroom, interacting with students and teachers,
and in carrying out activities that prepare them for
more advanced practica. Pre-service teachers are
involved in 25 hours of classroom experience,
normally 2 ½ hours a week for 10 weeks (or 30
hours of classroom experience if the course
happens for one to two weeks during the month
of May. Requests for May practica are processed
through the Dean’s office.).

NB: Pass/Fail course.
Co-requisite(s): EDUC 401 or 411.
Prerequisite(s): EDUC 303; minimum 90
semester hours; and a minimum 2.70 GPA.

EDUC 403 Initial Classroom
Experience (1 sem. hr.)



                                                  192
These initial classroom experiences provide
students with meaningful educational experiences
in schools and classrooms. Students relate their
studies in the university classroom to school
settings. Throughout the course and school visits,
students become more confident in being in the
classroom, interacting with students and teachers,
and in carrying out activities that prepare them for
more advanced practica. Pre-service teachers are
involved in 25 hours of classroom experience,
normally 2 ½ hours a week for 10 weeks (or 30
hours of classroom experience if the course
happens for one to two weeks during the month
of May. Requests for May practica are processed
through the Dean’s office.).

NB: Pass/Fail course.
Prerequisite(s): EDUC 402; minimum 90
semester hours; and a minimum 2.70 GPA.

EDUC 411 Early Learning Curriculum
and Assessment (3 sem. hrs.)
An exploration of early childhood theories,
philosophical perspectives, effective practices,
curriculum and assessment and an overall
understanding of what it means to effectively
support and nurture early learners. The vital role
of a well-prepared early learning educator and the
importance of learning through play, emergent
curriculum and authentic assessment methods will
be thoroughly examined. Content addresses the
entire spectrum of a child’s growth and
development within the context of place, families,
and communities: linguistic, socio-cultural,
emotional, physical, spiritual, and cognitive
development.

Co-requisite(s): EDUC 402.
Prerequisite(s): EDUC 321; minimum 90
semester hours; and a minimum 2.70 GPA. (3-0;
0-0)

EDUC 412 Strategies for the
Exceptional Child (4 sem. hrs.)
This course builds upon the information
presented in introductory courses to special
education. It is intended for pre-professional
Education students and those in psychology,
social services, and nursing, and is designed to
provide information and strategies for: assessing
the needs of students, developing intervention
techniques, and utilizing the resources of various
professionals to meet the diverse needs of
exceptional students and exceptional families.
Enrolment in this class includes a practicum in a
special needs setting.

Cross-listed: PSYC 412.
Prerequisite(s): EDUC 310; minimum 90
semester hours; and a minimum 2.70 GPA.
(0-0; 3-1)

EDUC 430 Foundations and Principles
of Music Education (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to the historical, philosophical,
sociological, and psychological foundations of
music education. Topics include program
development, teaching methods, administration,
supervision, and evaluation.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: MUSI 430.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 131, 132, 225, 226; third
or fourth year standing. (3-0; 3-0)

EDUC 435 Teaching and Learning in
the Middle Years (3 sem. hrs.)
This course focusses on understanding the needs
of young adolescents, which involve identity
formation, agency, self-discovery, and
relationships. Signature pedagogies for middle
school learners as well as current trends and
recent research, for organizing and planning
curriculum, transitions, and for structuring
classrooms as learner centred spaces of intentional
design are core content areas. Specific topics
include characteristics of 10- to 14-year-olds and
the implications for learning; curriculum
integration through inquiry; building student-
teacher, teacher-parent, and student-student
partnerships; evaluation and assessment in the
middle years; and balanced literacy and numeracy
methodologies

Prerequisite(s): EDUC 321; and a minimum 90
semester hours. (3-0; 3-0)

EDUC 451 Classroom Teaching:
Theory and Practice (7 sem. hrs.)
This course is designed to help prospective
teachers reflect on factors that make classrooms
and schools effective communities for learning.


                                                193
Students recognize, develop, and practice the
relevant strategies and skills required for effective
teaching and learning, and reflect on their teaching
and its effects on student growth and learning.
Eight weeks is classroom practica; six weeks
focuses on a process of deliberation and reflective
action that interrelates theory and practice.

NB: 7 sem. hrs. Theory; 8 sem. hrs. Practica
(EDUC 452). Students may not take other courses
when taking EDUC 451, 452, except required
curriculum and pedagogy courses. Pass/Fail
course.
Co-requisite(s): EDUC 452.
Prerequisite(s): Acceptance into the Professional
Year Program.

EDUC 452 Classroom Teaching:
Theory and Practice (8 sem. hrs.)
This course is designed to help prospective
teachers reflect on factors that make classrooms
and schools effective communities for learning.
Students recognize, develop, and practice the
relevant strategies and skills required for effective
teaching and learning, and reflect on their teaching
and its effects on student growth and learning.
Eight weeks is classroom practica; six weeks
focuses on a process of deliberation and reflective
action that interrelates theory and practice.

NB: 8 sem. hrs. Practica, 7 sem. hrs. Theory
(EDUC 451). Students may not take other courses
when taking EDUC 451, 452, except required
curriculum and pedagogy courses. Pass/Fail
courses.
Co-requisite(s): EDUC 451.
Prerequisite(s): Acceptance into the Professional
Year Program.

EDUC 453 Extended Practicum (15
sem. hrs.)
This course, part of the PYP (Professional Year
Program) is a 14-week semester including eight
weeks of full immersion, three to four weeks
partial immersion, and two weeks of seminars.
Pre-service teachers will relate principles and
theories from conceptual frameworks to actual
practice in classrooms and schools. School
placement will normally be appropriate to the
grade levels and subject specialties which the
student expects to teach after the program’s
completion.

NB: Students may not take other courses when
taking EDUC 453 except required curriculum and
pedagogy courses. Pass/Fail course.
Prerequisite(s): EDUC 451 and 452. Acceptance
into the Professional Year Program.

EDUC 455 Curriculum and Pedagogy:
K–7 Language Arts (3 sem. hrs.)
An overview of the development of language and
literacy in children and the teaching of language
arts in the elementary school including topics such
as: the nature of the reading and writing process;
becoming members of a literature culture; and
components and organization of effective reading
and writing programs. The course will be guided
by the assumption that literature, literacy, and faith
intersect in powerful, personal ways.

Prerequisite(s): EDUC 321; and a minimum 90
semester hours. (0-0; 3-0)

EDUC 456 Curriculum and Pedagogy:
K–7 Mathematics (2 sem. hrs.)
The components of an effective elementary
school mathematics program: goals of
mathematics teaching and learning, recent
curriculum trends, function and use of
instructional materials, teaching strategies and
learning activities, problem solving strategies and
skills, and evaluation procedures. This course is
part of the PYP (Professional Year Program).

Co-requisite(s): EDUC 451 and 452.
Prerequisite(s): Acceptance into the Professional
Year Program.

EDUC 457 Curriculum and Pedagogy:
K–7 Social Studies (2 sem. hrs.)
A survey and evaluation of recent trends, teaching
strategies, learning approaches, and resources in
elementary and middle social studies. Participants
engage in constructing their own understanding of
the rationales, goals, and strategies appropriate for
social studies instruction. Additionally, course
participants practice selecting and analyzing
current social studies resources and instructional
methods, and design and create effective and



                                                  194
engaging teaching materials. This course is part of
the PYP (Professional Year Program).

Prerequisite(s): EDUC 451 and 452; acceptance
into the Professional Year Program.

EDUC 458 Curriculum and Pedagogy:
K–7 Science (2 sem. hrs.)
A survey of research in science education, goals of
science education; current curricula and resources;
planning an elementary-level program; children’s
science learning; teaching strategies for diverse
learners; teaching for inquiry and critical thinking;
planning and implementing hands-on activities.

Prerequisite(s): EDUC 451 and 452; acceptance
into the Professional Year Program.

EDUC 459 Curriculum and Pedagogy:
Strategies for Teaching Reading and
Writing at the Primary Level (1 sem.
hr.)
An extension of EDUC 455 as applied to the
primary grades (K-2), especially with respect to
developing reading and writing proficiency.
Theories and models of reading and writing
processes. Diagnosing individual strengths and
weaknesses in reading and writing development.
Planning, organizing, implementing, and assessing
a balanced literacy program. Evaluating and
choosing resources. Developing learning activities.

Co-requisite(s): EDUC 451 and 452.
Prerequisite(s): EDUC 455; acceptance into the
Professional Year Program.

EDUC 460 Curriculum and Pedagogy:
Strategies for Teaching Reading and
Writing at the Intermediate Level (1
sem. hr.)
An extension of EDUC 455 as applied to the
intermediate and middle grades (3-8), especially
with respect to developing reading and writing
proficiency and the study of literature. Models and
practices of reading and writing instruction are
introduced and explored. The role of text
structure and grammar are examined. Selecting
and teaching a range of genres, especially works
written for older children, are included. Planning,
organizing, implementing, developing, and
assessing a balanced language arts program that
targets writing acquisition and reading/writing
connections are stressed. This course is part of the
PYP (Professional Year Program).

Co-requisite(s): EDUC 451 and 452.
Prerequisite(s): EDUC 455; acceptance into the
Professional Year Program.

EDUC 465 Teaching and Learning in
Secondary School (3 sem. hrs.)
The nature of learning and appropriate teaching
strategies for students in high schools. Current
trends and recent research as a basis for learning
and teaching strategies, for organizing and
planning curriculum, and for structuring
classrooms and schools. Specific topics include
characteristics of 14- to 18-year-olds and the
implications for learning; curriculum integration;
building student-teacher, teacher-parent, and
student-student partnerships; evaluation and
assessment; personal and career planning; and
evidence-informed practice in the senior years.

Prerequisite(s): EDUC 321; and a minimum 90
semester hours. (0-0; 3-0)

EDUC 468 Curriculum and Pedagogy:
Teaching French as a Second
Language (2 sem. hrs.)
This course facilitates teachers and pre-service
teachers to teach French as an additional language.
It is designed to integrate theory and application
in order to enhance successful additional language
learning. Special attention is given to teaching
French in Grades K–7, but higher-class levels are
also addressed.

NB: Offered in May on Saturdays so it is available
to practicing teachers.
Prerequisite(s): Teacher Certification or EDUC
321.

EDUC 471 Curriculum and Pedagogy:
An Introduction to Teaching the
Humanities Grades 8–12 (2 sem. hrs.)
An overview of curriculum organization and
principles of teaching and learning in Social
Studies and English at the secondary level. The
connection with the Humanities is understood as



                                                195
a key ingredient in Education, but so is the
integration of the Humanities in all other subjects
in the curriculum. The course is guided by the
view that the areas of the Humanities and faith
intersect in powerful and personal ways. All
Professional Year secondary students are required
to take EDUC 471. This course is part of the PYP
(Professional Year Program).

Co-requisite(s): EDUC 451, 452.
Prerequisite(s): EDUC 465; acceptance into the
Professional Year Program.

EDUC 472 Curriculum and Pedagogy:
An Introduction to Teaching the
Natural and Mathematical Sciences
Grades 8–12 (2 sem. hrs.)
Curriculum organization and principles of
teaching the natural and mathematical sciences;
developing a basic understanding of the aims,
content and pedagogy in secondary math and
science; evaluation of selected science and math
resources; developing curriculum, instruction and
assessment for a unit plan; promotion of science
literacy and numeracy (math literacy); teaching
strategies for diverse learners; teaching for inquiry,
problem-based learning, critical thinking and
responsible citizenship. All Professional Year
secondary students are required to take EDUC
472. This course is part of the PYP (Professional
Year Program).

Co-requisite(s): EDUC 451, 452.
Prerequisite(s): Acceptance into the Professional
Year Program.

EDUC 475 Advanced Teaching and
Learning Praxis in Major Teachable
Subject Grades 8–12 (3 sem. hrs.)
A mentorship by master teachers in the field in a
student’s main area of secondary subject
specialization. Students use a guide and
assignment rubrics to research effective teaching
and learning strategies in their main subject area.
They discuss their findings with their subject
mentor and, possibly, other teachers in the school.
Students also attend seminars with the course
coordinator, and present an overview and
evaluation of their findings in a culminating
session. This course is part of the PYP
(Professional Year Program).
Prerequisite(s): EDUC 451, 452, 465; acceptance
into the Professional Year Program.

EDUC 490 Special Topics and Issues
in Education (3 sem. hrs.)
An examination of special topics or issues in
education that are not considered in depth in
other education courses. Requests are processed
through the Dean’s office.

NB: Not offered every year. See the Dean of
Education.
Prerequisite(s): Minimum 90 semester hours.
(3-0; 3-0)

EDUC 495 Critical Issues, Values and
Class Management (3 sem. hrs.)
A consideration and analysis of selected critical
concerns in education that link and interact with
broad issues in culture and society. The course
emphasizes how Christian conceptions of justice,
leadership, and discipline affect approaches to
educational issues, including controversial issues,
the implications of legal decisions, classroom
organization and technology in the classroom.
This course examines leadership approaches and
models appropriate to the K-12 classroom. A
range of discipline approaches and models are
introduced, discussed, and critiqued. The nature of
issues and problems confronting children and
youth today are examined in order to gain an
understanding of classroom life.

NB: Taken concurrently with EDUC 496.
Prerequisite(s): EDUC 321; minimum 90
semester hours; and a minimum 2.70 GPA. (3-0;
3-0)

EDUC 496 Indigenous Perspectives in
Education (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of Indigenous culture and worldview, the
history of Indigenous education in Canada,
current social, economic, political, and ethical
issues affecting Indigenous education, and the
current structure and status of Indigenous
education in British Columbia, with an emphasis
on indigenous language preservation and
education. Understanding and integrating
Indigenous learning, epistemologies and
pedagogical approaches, literature and learning
resources is the key focus of inquiry, supporting


                                               196
the consideration of teaching and learning in
diverse classrooms that include Indigenous
students, as well as teaching and learning in
Indigenous schools.

NB: Taken concurrently with EDUC 495.
Prerequisite(s): EDUC 321; minimum 90
semester hours; minimum 2.70 GPA. (3-0; 3-0)



Education, Graduate
Courses
EDUC 504 Evaluating Statistics and
Research (3 sem. hrs.)
This course prepares students to evaluate and
critique statistics and research methods in
Education and Counselling Psychology, including
learning about the use and misuse of basic
quantitative and qualitative analytical techniques in
research and in program evaluation. The course
also introduces ethical issues in research and
conducting critical reviews of the literature.

EDUC 512 Strategies for the
Exceptional Child (3 sem. hrs.)
This course builds upon the information
presented in introductory courses to special
education. It is intended for pre-professional
education students, professional teachers, and
those in psychology, social services, and nursing,
and is designed to provide information and
strategies for: assessing the needs of students,
developing intervention techniques, and utilizing
the resources of various professionals to meet the
diverse needs of exceptional students and
exceptional families. Enrolment in this class
includes a practicum in a special needs setting.

EDUC 513 Current Issues and the
Exceptional Child (3 sem. hrs.)
This is the foundational course that covers current
trends and issues which transcend any particular
“category” of diversity. In particular, the course
critically examines the current educational practice
of “full inclusion” and lays the foundation for
critically evaluating how content of subsequent
courses might lead to more inclusive learning
communities. This is the introductory course that
brings together each new cohort in the master’s
program and so one important focus is the
establishment of a cooperative learning
community. This course also lays the groundwork
for future work toward either a major project or
thesis by introducing the basic elements of each as
they relate to this program.

EDUC 514 Assessment of Students
with Learning Needs – Level B
Assessment (3 sem. hrs.)
The understanding, administration, scoring and
interpretation of “Level B” (APA) tests for
students with special learning needs, including
tests of word reading, passage comprehension,
arithmetic, spelling, and receptive vocabulary. This
course covers the practical understanding and use
of assessment devices and techniques. Students
discuss recent litigation issues about assessment
and learn to read and understand “Level C”
reports (school psychologists, speech-language
pathologists, etc.).

EDUC 515 Lab: Field Based
Assessments and IEP Development (2
sem. hrs.)
In the authentic ecology of their professional
placements, students focus on students with
exceptional learning needs and apply the
principles of assessment learned in the previous
course segment to gather assessment data of
various forms, including basic achievement and
diagnostic tests. Based on these assessments
(including formal tests as appropriate) students
then apply the data in developing model
Individualized Education Plans (IEPs). As
members of the cooperative student cohort,
students vet these data and plans among peers in
the course.

EDUC 516 Students with Diverse
Cognitive Needs (3 sem. hrs.)
This course builds upon the information
presented in introductory courses to special
education and, in conjunction with other courses
in the program, examines in-depth the unique
learning characteristics and needs of persons who
are on either end of the continuum of cognitive
abilities, and those with at least average intellectual



                                                   197
ability but who demonstrate learning disabilities.
Also examined is the evolving discourse on
neurodiversity and the challenges of students who
fit the evolving description of those on the
Autism Spectrum of Disorders (ASD) or
Pervasive Developmental Disability Not
Otherwise Specified (PDD-NOS). Given the wide
range of challenges (behavioural, communication,
social) they are critically examined in other
courses; it is intended that there be continuity and
overlap in the content of the various courses in
the overall program.

EDUC 517 Diverse Emotional and
Behavioural Needs (3 sem. hrs.)
The traditional special education categories of
behavioural needs or mental illness are examined.
Included are the concerns of students with
diagnoses such as anxiety and depression
according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
for Mental Disorder Fifth Edition (DSM-5), as
well as students with behaviour disorders. Also
included are the behavioural concerns of students
with autism, intellectual disabilities, and attentional
difficulties. The British Columbia Ministry of
Education criteria for designation in the
Behavioural Needs or Mental Illness categories are
addressed. The course includes a critical review of
literature, building on students’ extant knowledge
and professional experience and an examination
of current best practice in the areas addressed.
Classroom intervention strategies are studied and
are critically evaluated.

EDUC 518 Students with Diverse
Sensory Needs (3 sem. hrs.)
This course deals with students who have visual or
auditory deficits, ranging from mild to profound
in regard to hearing and partially sighted to blind
in regard to vision. In addition to sensory
components, the course addresses students with
unique physical challenges and those who may
have multiple disabilities or for whom the
foregoing may have a cause-and-effect
relationship to disorders of communication.
Unique characteristics and learning needs of other
low-incidence exceptionalities are also addressed.

EDUC 519 Special Topics in Diversity
(3 sem. hrs.)
An examination of special topics or issues in
diversity in education that are not considered in
depth in other courses. This course is preparatory
for commencement of the Knowledge Transition
Project (EDUC 697).

EDUC 540 Christian Approaches on
Teaching and Pedagogy (3 sem. hrs.)
An examination of the theory and practice of
teaching and pedagogy, including: the nature of
teaching; a biblical framework for understanding
and implementing teaching and learning; the
classroom context for teaching and learning; the
relationship between teaching and a teacher’s
personal, professional, and spiritual growth;
theories of instruction and distinctively Christian
approaches to instruction; and a taxonomy of
teaching strategies.

NB: Summer sessions only.
Prerequisite(s): Undergraduate degree in
education.

EDUC 545 Assessing and Evaluating
Student Learning (3 sem. hrs.)
An understanding of assessment and its
implementation as an integral part of the
curriculum planning. How the purpose of an
assessment must fit with the assessment strategy
employed. Distinctions between diagnostic
assessment, assessment for learning, assessment of
learning, and assessment as learning. The
interpretation of assessment results in order to
shape current and future teaching and learning
activities. Clear and accurate communication of
the results of assessment for particular audiences.

NB: Summer sessions only.
Prerequisite(s): Undergraduate degree in
education.

EDUC 548: Providing for Student
Diversity in the Classroom (3 sem.
hrs.)
Meeting the needs of diverse learners in
classroom: developing strategies for exceptional
students and ones with diverse cultural
backgrounds, and implementing differentiated
learning.

NB: Summer sessions only.


                                                 198
Prerequisite(s): Undergraduate degree in
education.

EDUC 569 Curriculum and Pedagogy:
Biblical Studies (3 sem. hrs.)
The Bible and its use in Christian schools. How to
teach Biblical Studies from Grades K–12, how to
use the Bible as a devotional book, and how the
Bible gives direction to the learning-teaching
process in all areas of the curriculum. The wisdom
literature of the Bible, the Minor Prophets, and
the Gospels, both from the point of view of how
these can be taught in the classroom and to
extrapolate from them pedagogical guidelines for
teaching of Bible. Planning scope and sequence
charts, units, and learning activities.

NB: Summer sessions only.
Prerequisite(s): Undergraduate degree in
education.

EDUC 599 Ethical Issues in Diversity
(3 sem. hrs.)
This course serves as the capstone course in the
Master of Arts in Educational Studies – Special
Education program. It reviews the current state of
the field and addresses numerous ethical and
moral issues such as the inherent value of life and
of euthanasia. In addition, social role valorization
is explored in the context of persons with special
learning needs as well as related issues of diversity
in culture and gender.

EDUC 601 Research Design (3 sem.
hrs.)
This seminar-style course provides training in
quantitative, qualitative, and mixed-methods
designs for conducting research in social sciences.
It is an advanced level course that assumes
competencies in statistics and social scientific
research. Students are exposed to the methods
and stages of basic research, applied research, and
program evaluation. An emphasis is placed on
educating students to critically reflect on the
methods themselves – their philosophical
underpinnings, promises, and limitations. This
course is designed to be interactive and entails a
mix of lectures, discussion, and classroom activity.
EDUC 602 Advanced Statistics (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course is an examination of common
parametric and non-parametric statistical
techniques used in psychology education and
other social sciences research, and principles of
accurate application and interpretation of those
techniques (e.g., effect size; power; sample size;
implications of violations of test assumptions).
Topics focus on multiple regression, different
models of analysis of variance and covariance, and
also include categorical data analysis, meta-
analysis, and an introduction to interpretation of
multivariate statistics. An emphasis is placed on
applied data analysis and accurate
conceptualization, rather than statistical theory.

EDUC 603 Comprehensive Exam (3
sem. hrs.)
Every non-thesis student in the MA in
Educational Studies (Special Education) program
is required to write a comprehensive examination.
The comprehensive is a take-home written exam
of 72 hours duration, typically scheduled from a
Friday to a Monday. The exam consists of
questions from the coursework integrating the
professional practice of supporting diverse
learners in education within case scenarios, and
questions addressing the ethical and legal practice
of the profession. Students co-create the exam
syllabus from the beginning of the program so
they can prepare for the exam as they complete
the program requirements.

Prerequisite(s): All course work must be
completed before the comprehensive exam is
written.

EDUC 690 Major Project (4 or 5 sem.
hrs.)
A major project examines an applied issue from a
leadership perspective and, preferably, from the
participant’s place of employment. The paper
focuses on a combination of course content and
on a quality presentation of content.

EDUC 691 Educational Leadership
Mentorship (1 sem. hr.)




                                                199
An educational leadership mentorship experience
taken by students who elect to take EDUC 690
for 4 sem. hrs.

EDUC 697 Major Project (3 sem. hrs.)
The major project is a synthesis of research,
theory, and practice. Students work under the
supervision of an approved supervisor to design,
implement and evaluate a project related to their
professional field of interest. Such projects may
involve an analysis of current educational policy,
development of a curriculum product, or an in-
depth analysis of extant literature on a particular
topic related to the course of study. The main
focus of the project is the integration of research,
theoretical and practice perspectives to a particular
practice, focus or problem.

Prerequisite(s): EDUC 601, 603, and 599 or
permission.

EDUC 698 Thesis I (3 sem. hrs.)
Students are required to complete a thesis (6 sem.
hrs.) that passes an examiner external to the
University with expertise in the particular area of
the thesis. The thesis must be defended orally
before an examination committee. Students may
choose their area of research with help from the
program director and other faculty. This may
occur at any time after their first semester in the
program.

Prerequisite(s): EDUC 601, (602), and
permission.

EDUC 699 Thesis II (3 sem. hrs.)
Students are required to complete a thesis (6 sem.
hrs.) that passes an examiner external to the
University with expertise in the particular area of
the thesis. The thesis must be defended orally
before an examination committee. This is the
second phase of the thesis project. Students may
choose their area of research with help from the
program director and other faculty. This choice
may occur at any time after their first semester in
the program.

Prerequisite(s): EDUC 601, 602, 698, and
permission.
English
NB: Two of the following courses, ENGL 101, 102,
103 and 104, are compulsory during first year for all new
full-time (12 or more sem. hrs.) students, or, if a WRTG
course is required at the point of admission to the
University, in the next two consecutive semesters following
the successful completion of WRTG 100 or 101. Students
may not take any of these WRTG or ENGL courses
concurrently since each WRTG/ENGL course builds on
the previous courses.

ENGL 101 Introduction to Writing (3
sem. hrs.)
This course guides students through the writing
and research tasks of the university classroom in
order to equip them with confidence and the
ability to write in a variety of academic genres,
including the research paper. Students expand
critical thinking skills through reading and writing
cognitively complex arguments while also
exploring academic voice, style, and vocabulary.

Prerequisite(s): WRTG 100 or 101 unless
exempt at point of admission to the University. (3-
0; 3-0)

ENGL 102 Introduction to Literature
and Culture (3 sem. hrs.)
This course examines literature from a
multicultural perspective. In comparing and
contrasting works of literature composed in a
variety of countries, students will gain cultural
literacy, appreciation of universal themes, and
understanding of the rich relationship between
literature and its historical and situational context.
In studying this material, students will develop
their critical thinking, research, and writing skills.
This course is recommended for students who
have come from international contexts.

Prerequisite(s): WRTG 100 or 101 unless
exempt at point of admission to the University. (3-
0 or 3-0)

ENGL 103 Introduction to Fiction (3
sem. hrs.)
An introductory study of fiction with the purpose
of understanding literature and cultivating skills in
scholarly research, textual analysis, and academic


                                                       200
writing and documentation. Such skills are
fostered by closely reading and analyzing works of
short fiction and the novel by accomplished prose
stylists. Students focus on the distinctive
conventions of fiction in order to interpret these
works critically, while interacting thoughtfully with
themes presented therein; there is a particular
focus on analyzing and making use of narrative
strategies and rhetorical tools. Students continue
to develop their academic prose, with attention to
improving foundational grammar, diction,
phrasing, organization, and argument-building in
the thesis-driven essay.

Prerequisite(s): WRTG 100 or 101 unless
exempt at point of admission to the University. (3-
0; 3-0)

ENGL 104 Introduction to Poetry and
Drama (3 sem. hrs.)
Building on the skills acquired in English 103, an
advanced study of poetry and drama with the
purpose of understanding literature and cultivating
skills in scholarly research, textual analysis, and
academic writing and documentation. Such skills
are fostered by closely reading and analyzing
poems and plays by accomplished writers.
Students focus on the distinctive conventions of
the genres of poetry and drama in order to
interpret these works critically, while interacting
thoughtfully with themes presented therein; there
is a particular focus on analyzing and making use
of effective patterns of language, lyrical and
theatrical presentation, and figures of speech.
Students continue to develop their academic
prose, with attention to advanced grammar,
diction, phrasing, organization, and argument-
building in the thesis-driven essay.

Prerequisite(s): WRTG 100 or 101 unless
exempt at point of admission to the University. (3-
0; 3-0)

ENGL 130 Becoming a Writing Tutor
(1 sem. hr.)
A guided research and practical study of writing
tutoring and English language pedagogy. Students
will investigate complex academic writing
techniques and learn to apply them in professional
contexts.
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 103, 104. (3,0)

ENGL 207 Introduction to Creative
Writing (3 sem. hrs.)
A seminar in the techniques of imaginative writing
and in the development of a critical appreciation
of the art of writing in its varied forms. This
course focuses on free verse poetry, flash fiction,
the short story, and short dramatic works.

Prerequisite(s): ENGL 213 or ENGL 214, with
a minimum grade of B. (2-1; 2-1)

ENGL 208 Introduction to Creative
Writing (3 sem. hrs.)
A seminar in the techniques of imaginative writing
and in the development of a critical appreciation
of the art of writing in its varied forms. This
course focuses on formal verse poetry, the longer
short story, and the novel, plus full-length
dramatic works.

Prerequisite(s): ENGL 213 or ENGL 214, with
a minimum grade of B. (2-1; 2-1)

ENGL 213 Major Authors (3 sem. hrs.)
A concentrated study of ten to twelve authors
from the medieval period to the early eighteenth
century, including Chaucer, Shakespeare, and
Milton.

NB: Strongly recommended for students
intending to major in English.
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 103, 104. (3-0; 3-0)

ENGL 214 Major Authors (3 sem. hrs.)
The concentrated study of ten to twelve authors
from the eighteenth to the twentieth century,
including at least two novelists.

NB: Strongly recommended for students
intending to major in English.
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 103, 104. (3-0; 3-0)

ENGL 216 Introduction to Poetry in
the Twentieth Century (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to poetry, its forms and
conventions, as well as innovations in its
development during the twentieth century, with




                                               201
particular representation from the American
tradition.

NB: This course may not be taken for credit if
ENGL 316 is taken for credit.
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 103, 104. (3-0 or 3-0)

ENGL 217 Introduction to Canadian
Literature (3 sem. hrs.)
A historical survey of representative works of
Canadian prose, poetry, and drama prior to 1960.

NB: This course may not be taken for credit if
ENGL 317 is taken for credit.
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 103, 104. (3-0; 0-0)

ENGL 218 Studies in Modern
Canadian Literature (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of representative works of modern
Canadian poetry, fiction, and drama after 1960.

NB: This course may not be taken for credit if
ENGL 318 is taken for credit.
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 103, 104. (0-0; 3-0)

ENGL 219 Studies in Short Fiction (3
sem. hrs.)
The exploration of shorter narratives, primarily
through a study of the short story and novella of
the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.

Prerequisite(s): ENGL 103, 104. (3-0; 0-0)

ENGL 222 Studies in the Novel (3
sem. hrs.)
Traces the development of the novel written in
English through a study of works written between
the eighteenth and twentieth centuries.

Prerequisite(s): ENGL 103, 104. (0-0; 3-0)

ENGL 223 Introduction to American
Literature (3 sem. hrs.)
A survey of American literature from the colonial
period to the present. Readings will be drawn
from major writers such as Nathaniel Hawthorne,
Edgar Allan Poe, Herman Melville, Mark Twain,
and Henry James, along with poets such as Anne
Bradstreet, Emily Dickinson, and Walt Whitman,
and essayists Henry David Thoreau, Ralph Waldo
Emerson, and Jonathan Edwards, all writers of
influence in the literary and historical contexts of
America.

NB: This course may not be taken for credit if
ENGL 323 is taken for credit.
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 103, 104. (3-0; 3-0)

ENGL 224 Introduction to American
Literature: 1850 to the Present (3 sem.
hrs.)
A course in American literature (prose and poetry)
from 1850 to the present, emphasizing the
continuity of the American literary tradition and
focusing on literary analysis of and theoretical
perspectives on representative works of the novel,
short fiction, and essays in their particular
conventions. Readings will be drawn from major
writers such as Edith Wharton, Stephen Crane,
Edna St. Vincent Millay, F. Scott Fitzgerald,
William Faulkner, John Steinbeck, Ernest
Hemingway, Raymond Carver, Flannery
O’Connor, and other writers of influence in the
literary and historical contexts of America.

NB: This course may not be taken for credit if
ENGL 324 is taken for credit.
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 103, 104 (3-0; 3-0)

ENGL 231 Classical Backgrounds of
English Literature (3 sem. hrs.)
Readings in Greek and Roman mythology, epic
poetry, and short poetry with attention to the
cultural and literary context of these works of
literature. This course includes the study of
selected works of English literature that have been
influenced by the Greek and Roman literary
tradition.

NB: Either ENGL 231 or 232 is strongly
recommended for English majors.
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 103, 104. (3-0; 0-0)

ENGL 232 Biblical Backgrounds of
English Literature (3 sem. hrs.)
Readings in the various genres of Biblical literature
with attention to the cultural and literary context
of these works. This course includes the study of
selected works of English literature that have been
influenced by the Biblical literary tradition.



                                                  202
NB: Either ENGL 231 or 232 is strongly
recommended for English majors.
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 103, 104. (3-0; 9-0)

ENGL 240 Indigenous Literatures (3
sem. hrs.)
Indigenous Literatures introduces the burgeoning
field of Indigenous literary studies, with a focus on
literature written by Canadian Indigenous and
Métis authors, poets, and playwrights. Applying
“First Peoples Principles of Learning”, students
will discuss, experience, examine, and write about
several genres, including oral traditions, poetry,
drama, fiction, and non-fiction. Through literature
and language, students will explore the key themes
of local knowledge and place, respect, resilience,
and trust.

Prerequisite(s): Any two of ENGL 101, 102, 103
or 104.

ENGL 290 Special Topics and Themes
in English Literature (3 sem. hrs.)
This course offers an intensive study of literature
focusing on one particular topic or theme. The
topical or thematic approach will allow students to
explore literary works across time periods and in
different genres that address areas of interest in
their liberal arts studies, since a semester’s study
might focus on one of these areas: politics,
athletics, religion, art, or ecology.

Prerequisite(s): ENGL 103, 104. (3-0; 0-0)

ENGL 305 The Grammar of English
for TESOL (3 sem. hrs.)
This course examines the structure, function, and
usage of English grammar within the context of
language teaching.

Cross-listed: LING 305
Prerequisite(s): LING/EDUC 268.

ENGL 307 The Writing of the Literary
Novel (3 sem. hrs.)
An advanced study and application of the
strategies and techniques involved in writing the
literary novel.
Prerequisite(s): minimum grade of B in either
ENGL 207 and/or 208.
Recommended: An English Course focusing on
the novel (e.g., ENGL 222, 371, 482).

ENGL 308 The Writing of Poetry (3
sem. hrs.)
An advanced study and application of poetic form
and content, focusing on evaluating and
producing literary poetry.

Prerequisite(s): minimum grade of B in either
ENGL 207 and/or ENGL 208.
Recommended: An English Course focusing on
the novel (e.g., ENGL 216/316, 372, 454, 471).

ENGL 310 The Writing of Creative
Nonfiction (3 sem. hrs.)
Studies in the reading and writing of literary non-
fiction, known as the “fourth genre”: (auto)
biography, memoir, diaries, travel and nature
writing, and personal essays. Writers include
Virginia Woolf, C.S. Lewis, Henry Thoreau,
Thomas Merton, E.M. Forster, George Orwell,
Michael Ondaatje, Annie Dillard, and others of
literary influence.

Prerequisite(s): minimum grade of B in ENGL
207 and/or ENGL 208. (3-0; 0-0)

ENGL 316 Introduction to Poetry in
the Twentieth Century (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to poetry, its forms and
conventions, as well as innovations in its
development during the twentieth century, with
particular representation from the American
tradition.

NB: This course may not be taken for credit if
ENGL 216 is taken for credit.
Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing, or instructor’s consent. (3-
0 or 3-0)

ENGL 317 Introduction to Canadian
Literature (3 sem. hrs.)
A historical survey of representative works of
Canadian prose, poetry, and drama to 1960.




                                                 203
NB: This course may not be taken for credit if
ENGL 217 is taken for credit.
Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing, or instructor’s consent. (3-
0; 0-0)

ENGL 318 Studies in Modern
Canadian Literature (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of representative works of modern
Canadian poetry, fiction, and drama after 1960.

NB: This course may not be taken for credit if
ENGL 218 is taken for credit.
Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing, or instructor’s consent. (0-
0; 3-0)

ENGL 323 Introduction to American
Literature (3 sem. hrs.)
A survey of American literature from the colonial
period to the present. Readings will be drawn
from major writers such as Nathaniel Hawthorne,
Edgar Allan Poe, Herman Melville, Mark Twain,
and Henry James, along with poets such as Anne
Bradstreet, Emily Dickinson, and Walt Whitman
and essayists Henry David Thoreau, Ralph Waldo
Emerson, and Jonathan Edwards, all writers of
influence in the literary and historical contexts of
America.

NB: This course may not be taken for credit if
ENGL 223 is taken for credit.
Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing, or instructor’s consent. (3-
0; 3-0)

ENGL 324 Introduction to American
Literature: 1850 to the Present (3 sem.
hrs.)
A course in American literature (prose and poetry)
from 1850 to the present, emphasizing the
continuity of the American literary tradition and
focusing on literary analysis of and theoretical
perspectives on representative works of the novel,
short fiction and essays in their particular
conventions. Readings will be drawn from major
writers such as Edith Wharton, Stephen Crane,
Edna St. Vincent Millay, F. Scott Fitzgerald,
William Faulkner, John Steinbeck, Ernest
Hemingway, Raymond Carver, Flannery
O’Connor, and other writers of influence in the
literary and historical contexts of America.

NB: This course may not be taken for credit if
ENGL 224 is taken for credit.
Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing, or instructor’s consent. (3-
0; 0-0)

ENGL 334 European Literature in
Translation (3 sem. hrs.)
A survey of European drama and prose classics
exploring and critically evaluating the shift in
worldviews from Dante’s Christian humanism to
Kafka’s and Camus’ modern existentialist views
and focusing on the theme of human nature (the
self) and the purpose of human life. Works are
discussed in their historical and cultural contexts.

Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing, or instructor’s consent. (3-
0; 0-0)

ENGL 348 World Drama (3 sem. hrs.)
This survey course of the dramatic literature of the
past 2500 years begins with the Greek and Roman
classic drama and principal Asian drama. It then
examines the Christian drama of the Middle Ages,
the Renaissance neoclassical drama of the early
modern period, and the eighteenth century
antecedents to the realistic drama of the
nineteenth century. Students also explore the
modern drama of the twentieth century, and the
global contemporary international drama of the
twenty-first century. This is a reading and
discussion course that requires students to read
major plays and attend live performances of world
dramatic masterpieces being performed at local
theatres.

Cross-listed: THTR 348.
Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing; or 6 sem. hrs. of English
and 3 sem. hrs. of theatre and third or fourth year
standing; or instructor’s consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

ENGL 351 Shakespeare I (3 sem. hrs.)
An intensive study of selected works by William
Shakespeare situated in their Elizabethan and
Jacobean contexts. Works studied may include
Venus and Adonis, the history play Richard III, the


                                                 204
comedy The Merchant of Venice, the tragedies Titus
Andronicus, Hamlet, and Antony and Cleopatra, and
the romances The Winter’s Tale and The Tempest.

NB: No overlap with ENGL 352.
Cross-listed: THTR 341.
Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing; or 6 sem. hrs. of English
and 3 sem. hrs. of theatre and third or fourth year
standing; or instructor’s consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

ENGL 352 Shakespeare II (3 sem.
hrs.)
An intensive study of selected works by William
Shakespeare situated in their Elizabethan and
Jacobean contexts. Works studied may include:
the sonnets, the history play Henry IV (Parts 1 and
2) or Henry V, the comedies A Midsummer Night’s
Dream and As You Like It, the problem play
Measure for Measure, the tragedies King Lear and
Macbeth, and the romance Cymbeline.

NB: No overlap with ENGL 351.
Cross-listed: THTR 342.
Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing; or 6 sem. hrs. of English
and 3 sem. hrs. of theatre and third or fourth year
standing; or instructor’s consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

ENGL 371 The Nineteenth-Century
Novel (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of representative novels from nineteenth
century Britain. The novel as a genre flourished
during this time as the novel’s form was shaped by
writers such as Jane Austen, Charlotte Brontë,
Charles Dickens, and George Eliot.

Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing, or instructor’s consent. (3-
0 or 0-0)

ENGL 372 Romantic Poetry and
Poetics (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of the poetry created by the six major
poets grouped under the term “romantic”:
William Blake, William Wordsworth, Samuel
Taylor Coleridge, Lord Byron (George Gordon),
Percy Bysshe Shelley, and John Keats. Students
consider both the poetry and critical theories of
these influential authors.
Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing, or instructor’s consent. (0-
0; 3-0)

ENGL 382 Studies in Modern British
Literature (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of representative works in British fiction
and poetry that have been most influential in
shaping and reflecting twentieth century
sensibilities and imaginations. The course may
include: the poetry of W.B. Yeats and T.S. Eliot,
and novels by Joseph Conrad, Virginia Woolf,
D.H. Lawrence, James Joyce, Ford Madox Ford,
William Golding and/or others of significant
influence in this tradition.

Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing, or instructor’s consent. (3-
0 or 3-0)

ENGL 384 Contemporary Canadian
Fiction (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of representative works of contemporary
Canadian fiction and the development of the post-
modern, post-colonial, post-national novel.
Authors (a minimum of six) may include: a
selection of Margaret Atwood, Dionne Brand,
Timothy Findley, Jack Hodgins, Hugh Hood,
Thomas King, Yann Martel, Rohinton Mistry,
Alice Munro, Michael Ondaatje, Sky Lee, Jane
Urquhart, Guy Vanderhaeghe, and Rudy Wiebe.

Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing, or instructor’s consent. (0-
0; 3-0)

ENGL 390 Studies in Individual
Authors and Themes in Literature (3
sem. hrs.)
This course is designed to give students the
opportunity to study the works of significant
writers while also providing opportunities for
engagement with significant thematic concerns
and special topics in literary studies. Students may
take more than one version of this course.

Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing, or instructor’s consent. (3-
0 or 3-0)




                                                 205
ENGL 391 Children’s Literature (3
sem. hrs.)
A survey of children’s literature from the sixteenth
century to the present, examining representative
texts and changing attitudes towards children and
their books. Various approaches to the literature
are used, although emphasis is on close critical
readings of the prescribed texts.

Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing, or instructor’s consent. (3-
0 or 3-0)

ENGL 392 Fantasy Literature (3 sem.
hrs.)
Approaches to the genre of fantasy literature,
including the study of early works (such as Beowulf
and Sir Gawain and the Green Knight) that shaped the
imagination of creators of modern fantasy such as
C.S. Lewis and J.R.R. Tolkien.

Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing, or instructor’s consent. (3-
0; 0-0)

ENGL 393 Canadian Drama (3 sem.
hrs.)
A survey of Canadian plays, starting with the first
official play written in North America (a
seventeenth century Canadian play) and
progressing to twenty-first century dramatists and
their texts. Students will engage in detailed
analyses of plays: their structures,
historical/cultural contexts, and present-day
relevance. The plays explore a variety of topics
and themes, including but not limited to family
life, social issues, class struggles, oppression, and
marginalization. Students will also read plays
about Indigenous culture and plays by Indigenous
writers.

NB: Attendance at theatre performances is
required. Not offered every year. See department
chair.
Cross-listed: THTR 343.
Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing; or 6 sem. hrs. of English
and 3 sem. hrs. of theatre and third or fourth year
standing; or instructor’s consent. (3-0; 0-0)
ENGL 394 Modern Drama (3 sem.
hrs.)
A study of eight to ten modern plays, British,
American, and Canadian, representing different
forms and approaches to drama in the last one
hundred years.

Cross-listed: THTR 344.
Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing; or 6 sem. hrs. of English
and 3 sem. hrs. of theatre and third or fourth year
standing; or instructor’s consent. (0-0; 3-0)

ENGL 395 Irish Drama (3 sem. hrs.)
A survey of the dramatic literature of Ireland,
focusing on twentieth century plays from Yeats to
Beckett and Friel. After a quick review of the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the course
turns to the drama of Irish nationalism and
follows its development into the international
arena.

Cross-listed: THTR 345.
Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing; or 6 sem. hrs. of English
and 3 sem. hrs. of theatre and third or fourth year
standing; or instructor’s consent. (3-0; 0-0)

ENGL 396 American Drama (3 sem.
hrs.)
A survey of significant American dramatic
literature. Touching on the eighteenth and
nineteenth century contributions from Royal
Tyler’s The Contrast (1787) to George Aiken’s Uncle
Tom’s Cabin (1853) and Steele MacKaye’s Hazel
Kirke (1880), the course moves quickly to Eugene
O’Neill’s Beyond the Horizon (1920), which many
historians consider the first truly indigenous
American drama of international import, and
examines the significant work of playwrights such
as Arthur Miller, Lillian Hellman, Tennessee
Williams, Sam Shepard, and David Mamet.

Cross-listed: THTR 346.
Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing; or 6 sem. hrs. of English
and 3 sem. hrs. of theatre and third or fourth year
standing; or instructor’s consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

ENGL 400 Special Topics in English
(3 sem. hrs.)

                                                206
Independent but guided research in a specialized
area of interest to the student. Directed studies are
not offered concurrently for courses available in
the regular academic year.

Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English, third or
fourth year standing, and instructor’s consent. (3-
0; 3-0)

ENGL 403 Preparing for English
Professions (1 sem. hrs.)
A seminar designed to introduce students to
practical techniques and strategies for continuing
in their academic and professional lives after
graduating with an English degree. This course
prepares students for further academic study, and
for writing in academic, creative, and professional
contexts.

Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing, or instructor’s consent. (3-
0 or 3-0)

ENGL 412 Studies in Twentieth-
Century American Literature (3 sem.
hrs.)
A study of representative works of twentieth
century American literature and the development
of its themes in various historical, political, and
socio-cultural contexts, including the major wars
and social upheavals in which American society
has been involved in the last one hundred years.
Works for discussion are drawn from influential
American voices of this period (at least six) such
as Ernest Hemingway, William Faulkner, F. Scott
Fitzgerald, John Steinbeck, Toni Morrison,
Theodore Dreiser, Walker Percy, Flannery
O’Connor, and Saul Bellow.
Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing, or instructor’s consent. (0-
0; 3-0)

ENGL 414 Literature and Spirituality
(3 sem. hrs.)
Literature has been at the centre of the human
story from its beginnings as recorded in ancient
sacred texts to its current study as cultural
narrative with transformative and transcendent
possibilities for interpretation and creativity. This
course will explore literary themes integral to the
pursuit of Christian spirituality, past and present.
Prerequisite(s): Enrolment priority given to
fourth-year English majors, concentrations, and
minors; third- and fourth-year students with a
minimum of 12 sem. hrs. of English are
considered.

ENGL 422 Chaucer (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of The Canterbury Tales and selected minor
works, which may include The Book of the Duchess,
The Parliament of Fowls, and Troilus and Criseyde. The
course involves reading Chaucer’s texts alongside
samples of contemporary and historical writings
ranging from mystical theology to natural
philosophy, including Boethius’ Consolation of
Philosophy and the Roman de la Rose. The student also
develops a good reading knowledge of Chaucerian
Middle English.

NB: No overlap with ENGL 430.
Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing, or instructor’s consent. (3-
0 or 3-0)

ENGL 430 Medieval English
Literature (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of non-Chaucerian medieval English
writings covering a number of different themes.
Works studied may include secular and religious
lyrics, sermons, debates, visionary or mystical
poetry and prose, and/or romance.

NB: No overlap with ENGL 422.
Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing, or instructor’s consent. (3-
0 or 3-0)

ENGL 450 Honours Essay (3 sem.
hrs.)
A research paper of 20 to 25 pages written in close
consultation with a member of the Department of
English and Creative Writing, to be completed in
the final semester of fourth year by all Honours
students.

Prerequisite(s): Admission to honours program.
See department chair. (0-0; 0-3)

ENGL 451 Drama to 1642 Excluding
Shakespeare (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of English drama from its liturgical
origins to the closing of the theatres in 1642,


                                                  207
including medieval mystery cycles and morality
plays as well as works by Elizabethan, Jacobean,
and Caroline playwrights.

Cross-listed: THTR 441.
Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing; or 6 sem. hrs. of English
and 3 sem. hrs. of theatre and third or fourth year
standing; or instructor’s consent. (3-0; 0-0)

ENGL 453 Milton (3 sem. hrs.)
The intensive study of selected works of poetry
and prose by John Milton, situated in their cultural
contexts. Particular attention is paid to Paradise
Lost and Paradise Regained.

Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing, or instructor’s consent. (3-
0; 0-0)

ENGL 454 Renaissance Poetry and
Prose (3 sem. hrs.)
The study of selected works of Renaissance poetry
and prose (excluding those by Shakespeare and
Milton), situated in their cultural contexts.

Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing, or instructor’s consent. (0-
0; 3-0)

ENGL 456 Seventeenth-Century
Women’s Writing (3 sem. hrs.)
The study of selected works written by women in
seventeenth century Britain and America, situated
in their cultural contexts.
Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing, or instructor’s consent. (0-
0; 0-3)

ENGL 462 Eighteenth-Century Drama
(3 sem. hrs.)
A survey of the English drama of the eighteenth
century. An examination of representative works
of the London stage and comparative continental
dramas, in transition and in cultural context.

Cross-listed: THTR 442.
Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing; or 6 sem. hrs. of English
and 3 sem. hrs. of theatre and third or fourth year
standing; or instructor’s consent. (3-0 or 3-0)
ENGL 465 Eighteenth-Century
Literature (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of the poetry, non-fiction prose, and
novels of the major writers of the neoclassical
period, including such authors as John Dryden,
Jonathan Swift, Alexander Pope, Samuel Johnson,
and Samuel Richardson.

Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing, or instructor’s consent. (3-
0; 0-0)

ENGL 471 Victorian Poetry and Prose
(3 sem. hrs.)
The study of the poetry and nonfiction prose of
British writers during the Victorian era (1837-
1901), including prose authors such as Thomas
Carlyle, John Stuart Mill, and John Ruskin, and
poets such as Elizabeth Barrett Browning, Robert
Browning, Gerard Manley Hopkins, and Alfred,
Lord Tennyson. The course considers these works
in the context of Victorian Britain’s preoccupation
with questions about politics, education, art,
science, religion, and the role of women.

Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing, or instructor’s consent. (0-
0; 3-0)

ENGL 482 World Literature in English
(3 sem. hrs.)
This course focuses on issues related to post-
colonialism and literature through the study of
works written in English by writers from post-
colonial nations.

Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing, or instructor’s consent. (3-
0 or 3-0)

ENGL 490 Literary Theory and
Criticism I (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of the major documents of literary theory
and criticism from Plato to Frye. Students
consider traditional texts and terminology
(historical development), genre conventions, and
the relation of literary texts to the author, to the
reader, and to social and cultural reality.




                                                  208
NB: This course is required of all honours
English students.
Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing, or instructor’s consent. (3-
0 or 3-0)

ENGL 495 Literary Theory and
Criticism II (3 sem. hrs.)
A survey of the major interpretive approaches to
literature from poststructuralism to the recent
ethical turn in literary theory. Designed to
complement ENGL 490, the course examines
contemporary theory and practice (e.g.,
deconstruction, psychoanalytic criticism, neo-
Marxism, historicism, philosophical hermeneutics,
gender studies, and ethical criticism) and considers
the social and intellectual context out of which
each approach arises.

NB: This course is required of all honours
English students.
Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing, or instructor’s consent. (3-
0 or 3-0)



English, Graduate
Courses
ENGL 510 The Writing of Creative
Nonfiction (3 sem. hrs.)
A seminar in the reading and writing of literary
nonfiction and in the development of a critical
appreciation of its various forms. The course
focuses on life writing in terms of its literary
forms, as the authors’ responses to their culture,
and as texts within which identity is shaped and
altered by the intentional acts of their writers.
Chosen texts demonstrate the art of life writing, as
well as other paradigms for its interpretation and
its literary and cultural influence. Such forms as
(auto)biography, memoir, letters, diaries, travel
and nature writing, and personal essays will
provide the models for students’ exploration of
this genre. Examples are drawn from writers such
as C.S. Lewis, Thomas Merton, E.M. Forster,
George Orwell, Michael Ondaatje, Annie Dillard,
Kathleen Norris, Flannery O’Connor, John
Bunyan, Virginia Woolf, and others who form
part of the literary canon of such writing.

ENGL 512 Studies in Twentieth-
Century American Literature (3 sem.
hrs.)
Examines representative works of twentieth
century American literary prose and the
development of its themes in various historical,
political, and socio-cultural contexts, including the
major wars and social upheavals in which
American society has been involved in the last one
hundred years. Students examine the major
themes and values that comprise a canon of
literature which addresses the literary movements
characterized by realism and naturalism and the
contexts of modernism and postmodernism to
which literature has responded in the American
tradition. American literature and its contributions
to the discussions on religion, morality and
Christianity, and the relationship between the
three, are engaged.

ENGL 514 Literature and Spirituality
(3 sem. hrs.)
Literature has been at the centre of the human
story from its beginnings as recorded in ancient
sacred texts to its current study as cultural
narrative with transformative and transcendent
possibilities for interpretation and creativity. This
course will explore literary themes integral to the
pursuit of Christian spirituality, past and present.
The movement to interdisciplinary interpretation
and literary hermeneutics demands that students,
as readers of text, understand the role that
Christian thought and aesthetics have played in
their influencing of contemporary literature. In
understanding that role, human spirituality is being
considered as one of the integral aspects of this
enterprise; Christian spirituality offers
foundational vantage points from which to
participate in this ongoing task of creativity and
engagement in the human condition.

ENGL 522 Chaucer (3 sem. hrs.)
This course focuses on Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales,
The Parliament of Fowls, and The Book of the Duchess.
Care is taken to develop a good reading
knowledge of Chaucerian Middle English. The
literary, social, economic, political, and spiritual
principles in Chaucer’s text, and the aesthetic


                                                  209
techniques employed to shape them, will be
situated within the historical and cultural context
of Ricardian, or late fourteenth century England.
Chaucer wrote for a populace that had confronted
decimating plagues as well as social, economic,
and religious upheaval. The course draws out the
competing medieval voices that emerge in the
works composed in this context, which often
articulate searing critiques of a complex,
disorderly, patriarchal, violent, and humorous
medieval world.

ENGL 530 Medieval English
Literature (3 sem. hrs.)
Focuses on the rich and varied visionary and
mystical literature of the early, high and late
Middle Ages, including the writings of Bernard of
Clairvaux, Richard of St. Victor, Julian of
Norwich, Margery Kempe, Richard Rolle, the
author of the Cloud of Unknowing, and Meister
Eckhart. The influence of early theologians and
philosophers (such as Origen, Plotinus, and
Augustine) on these mystics is considered in
detail, as is the influence of the medieval mystics
on mystical thinkers of Renaissance Europe
(including Teresa of Avila and John of the Cross).
This course also seeks to read the ontological and
epistemological elements of medieval mysticism
through the filter of modern philosophical
paradigms.

ENGL 534 European Literature in
Translation (3 sem. hrs.)
A survey of European drama and prose classics
from the thirteenth to the twentieth century, this
course explores and critically evaluates the shift in
worldviews from Dante’s Christian humanism to
Kafka’s and Camus’ modern existentialist view of
human existence. In order to provide depth to our
analysis of the works and to highlight the
significance of the shift in worldview, the works
will be discussed in their historical, philosophical,
and cultural contexts, in combination with close
reading and various theoretical interpretative
approaches.

ENGL 551 Shakespeare I (3 sem. hrs.)
Students study seven plays by William
Shakespeare (representative histories, tragedies,
comedies, and romances) in addition to his
narrative poem Venus and Adonis. Shakespeare’s
plays are considered as both established literary
works and as scripts written for performance, and
students apply different critical approaches to his
works in an attempt to discover the source and
nature of the play's aesthetic power and dramatic
force. The course attempts to determine whether
William Shakespeare is, as some have claimed, the
greatest and most influential writer of all time.

ENGL 552 Shakespeare II (3 sem.
hrs.)
Students examine seven representative plays (not
covered in ENGL 551) of William Shakespeare
and a selection of his sonnets. The Shakespearean
works are read within the historically specific
cultural context in which they were produced. The
course pays particular attention to the way in
which Shakespeare blurs generic, thematic, and
ideological boundaries in his poetic and dramatic
works — exploring his fusion of the tragic and the
comic, the sacred and the profane, the noble and
the plebeian, the fantastic and the historic, and the
orthodox and the transgressive. Students also
explore the ways in which these richly layered
texts affirm or interrogate the dominant cultural
values in Elizabethan and Jacobean Britain.

ENGL 553 Milton (3 sem. hrs.)
The major poetic works and selected prose of
Milton are read in light of his claim to be the
delegated spokesperson for God and Parliament
in early-modern England. Milton’s works are seen
both to reflect the tension and trauma of the Civil
War, Interregnum and Restoration, and to
participate in shaping a new state and new modes
of existence.

ENGL 554 Renaissance Poetry and
Prose (3 sem. hrs.)
The course examines representative selections of
the poetry and prose of the high and late
Renaissance periods in England, covering a
century from about 1580–1680, an era
characterized by an impressive range of literary
output that has never been rivaled in the western
world. Even apart from the work of the most
eminent figures— Shakespeare and Milton—this
period offers a rich and varied legacy of poetry
and impressive essays, treatises, and allegories, by
such great literary figures as Sidney, Spenser,
Marlowe, Jonson, Bacon, Donne, Herbert,


                                                 210
Marvell, Browne, Walton, Pepys, and Bunyan
who, along with other selected authors, are
represented in this course. The course also
addresses the political, religious, and theological
controversies that energized so much of the
writing of this dynamic century.

ENGL 556 Seventeenth-Century
Women’s Writing (3 sem. hrs.)
A survey of women’s writing in the seventeenth
century which examines the poetry, prose, and
dramatic works of literary figures such as Lady
Mary Wroth, Aemilia Lanyer, Anne Bradstreet,
Katherine Philips, Margaret Cavendish, and Aphra
Behn. The writings of these early-modern women
are examined in order to understand how they
address not only what it is to be a woman in early-
modern times, but what it is to be human, an
activity which involves the exploration of
historical practices, philosophical concepts,
political theories, and theological tenets.

ENGL 565 Eighteenth-Century
Literature (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of the poetry, non-fiction prose, and
novels of the major writers of the neoclassical
period, including such authors as John Dryden,
Jonathan Swift, Alexander Pope, Samuel Johnson,
and Samuel Richardson.

ENGL 567 Drama to 1642 Excluding
Shakespeare (3 sem. hrs.)
The study of selected dramatic works written in
English prior to the closing of the theatres in
1642, including medieval mystery and morality
plays and works by Elizabethan, Jacobean, and
Caroline playwrights, excluding Shakespeare.

ENGL 571 The Nineteenth-Century
Novel (3 sem. hrs.)
This course offers a study of representative novels
and novelists from nineteenth century Britain. The
novel as a genre flourished during this time, as the
novel’s form was shaped by writers such as Jane
Austen, Charlotte Brontë, Charles Dickens,
George Eliot, and Thomas Hardy.

ENGL 572 Romantic Poetry and
Poetics (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of the poetry created by the six major
poets grouped under the term “romantic”:
William Blake, William Wordsworth, Samuel
Taylor Coleridge, Lord Byron (George Gordon),
Percy Bysshe Shelley, and John Keats. The course
considers both the poetry and critical theories of
these influential authors. Graduate students
concentrate on the poetry and criticism of one
particular poet.

ENGL 573 Victorian Poetry and Prose
(3 sem. hrs.)
The study of the poetry and nonfiction prose of
British writers during the Victorian era (1837-
1901), including prose authors such as Thomas
Carlyle, John Stuart Mill, and John Ruskin, and
poets such as Elizabeth Barrett Browning, Robert
Browning, Gerard Manley Hopkins, and Alfred,
Lord Tennyson. The course considers these works
in the context of Victorian Britain’s preoccupation
with questions about politics, education, art,
science, religion, and the role of women.

ENGL 582 Studies in Modern British
Literature (3 sem. hrs.)
This course studies representative works in British
prose, fiction and poetry that both shape and
reflect contemporary British literary sensibilities. It
includes a selection of poetry from writers such as
W.B. Yeats, W.H. Auden, T.S. Eliot, Dylan
Thomas, D.H. Lawrence, Philip Larkin and
Seamus Heaney; prose from George Orwell and
Virginia Woolf; and novels from A.S. Byatt,
Joseph Conrad, John Fowles, David Mitchell and
Graham Swift.

ENGL 583 World Literature in English
(3 sem. hrs.)
This course focuses on issues related to post-
colonialism and literature through the study of
literature written in English by writers from post-
colonial nations.

ENGL 584 Contemporary Canadian
Fiction (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of representative works of contemporary
Canadian fiction and the development of the post-
modern, post-colonial, post-national novel.
Authors (a minimum of six) may include a
selection of Margaret Atwood, Dionne Brand,



                                                   211
Timothy Findley, Jack Hodgins, Hugh Hood,
Thomas King, Yann Martel, Rohinton Mistry,
Alice Munro, Michael Ondaatje, Sky Lee, Jane
Urquhart, Guy Vanderhaeghe, and Rudy Wiebe.

ENGL 590 Studies in Individual
Authors (3 sem. hrs.)
Designed to give students the opportunity of
studying for an entire semester the works of up to
two significant authors.

ENGL 591 Children’s Literature (3
sem. hrs.)
The course examines children’s literature from the
seventeenth century to the present, analyzing
representative texts and changing attitudes toward
children and their books. Beginning with early
didactic stories and traditional folk and fairy tales,
and then moving on to British, American, and
Canadian novels, the course focuses on questions
of history, philosophy, authorship, readership, and
genre. The emphasis is on close critical readings of
the texts.

ENGL 593 Fantasy Literature (3 sem.
hrs.)
Examines the long history of fantasy texts by first
locating works of George MacDonald, C.S. Lewis,
J.R.R. Tolkien, and Madeleine L’Engle within the
Anglo-Saxon epic and the Medieval romance
literary traditions in English literature, including
Beowulf and Sir Gawain and the Green Knight. The
course also considers how these works have
shaped the imagination of creators of modern
fantasy as well as the argument that modern
fantasy is a response to post-Enlightenment
rationalism.

ENGL 600 Core Seminar: Reading the
Signs of the Times: Text and
Interpretation (3 sem. hrs.)
Designed to orient students to the crucial
transition from modernist to postmodernist and
post-postmodernist models of texts and
interpretation, models that depend on changing
philosophical views of truth and reality. Examines
the main interpretive paradigms in literary studies
in order to show how views of reason, language,
and textuality continue to shape one’s life
horizons.
ENGL 607 Special Topics in English
Literature (3 sem. hrs.)
Topics may vary. Courses to date include:
 • Foundations of Ethical Being
 • James Baldwin: The Dialectic of Race and
     Religion
 • Kierkegaard’s Postscript
 • Life Writing as a Literary Genre: Biography
     as Identification of Self and Subjectivity
 • The Poetics of Resistance, Affirmation and
     Immigrant Voices and the Poetry of
     Trauma
 • Studies in George MacDonald
 • German Romanticism
 • Gothic Fiction
 • Poetics of American Literature
 • Merton and the Solitary Tradition
 • The Eighteenth-Century Novel
 • Jane Austen
 • Identity and Ethics in Communication
 • Milton and the Romantics
 • Shakespearean Trauma and the Early-
     Modern Suffering Self
 • Studies in the Late-Victorian Fiction of Sir
     Arthur Conan Doyle

ENGL 610 Bibliography (3 sem. hrs.)
Under the direction of the student’s approved
thesis or major research paper advisor, a course of
reading and study which leads to the development
of both a significant bibliographical essay (or
annotated bibliography) and a thesis proposal. The
latter includes at least the following: major
question(s) to be addressed; significance of the
issue(s); methodologies to be used; theories to be
addressed and primary sources to be examined.

ENGL 611/612 Thesis (3 sem. hrs.; 3
sem. hrs.)

ENGL 613 Major Essay (3 sem. hrs.)
Under the direction of a supervisor, students not
writing a thesis will research and write a major
paper of approximately 10,000–15,000 words in
length.

ENGL 615 “Of Paradise and Light”:
Early Modern Devotional Writing (3
sem. hrs.)


                                               212
The study of the literary expression of religious
desire, doubt, and despair in early-modern British
literature. The aesthetic shaping of spiritual belief
and sentiment within specific historical and
cultural contexts is investigated in a selection of
early-modern works, including those by Anne
Vaughan Lock, Robert Southwell, George
Herbert, John Donne, Elizabeth Melville, Henry
Vaughan, Richard Crashaw, An Collins, Thomas
Traherne, John Bunyan, George Fox, and
Margaret Fell Fox. Their works are read alongside
religious texts central to the Catholic and
Protestant traditions, including the Geneva Bible,
the Douay-Rheims Bible, the King James Bible,
the Book of Common Prayer, John Foxe’s Book of
Martyrs, the Thirty-Nine Articles, the Spiritual
Exercises of St. Ignatius of Loyola, and Joseph
Hall’s The Art of Divine Meditation.

ENGL 620 (Auto)biography as Literary
Genre: Self-Identification and
Subjectivity (3 sem. hrs.)
Examines (auto)biographies as literary artifacts,
responses to culture, and as texts within which
identity is shaped and altered by the intentional
acts of their writers. Examines current theories of
(auto)biography by including life studies written
by individuals whose association with the literary
order has its origins in intellectual and cultural
spheres. Explores how life writing participates in
the construction of identity and engages
subjectivity as a narrative strategy. Theorists
including Paul Ricoeur, George Steiner, Richard
Kearney, and Eva Hoffman are foundational to
this study. The reading list includes
(auto)biographical writings from authors such as:
Elie Wiesel, Victor Frankl, Eva Hoffman, Anne
Michaels, Michael Ondaatje, Dietrich Bonhoeffer,
Richard Foster, John Bunyan, Frederick Buechner,
Annie Dillard, Virginia Woolf, Lytton Strachey,
Jean-Paul Sartre, Simone de Beauvoir, Thomas
Merton, C.S. Lewis, and other significant
(auto)biographers of the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries.

ENGL 625 Christian Humanism (3
sem. hrs.)
This course seeks to recover humanism as a
central ethos of western culture and its Christian
roots in two ways: first, by tracing, as much as
possible, the story of humanism and its
development from Christian roots to the
Renaissance and to Postmodernity and its current
“overcoming.” This historical exercise requires a
counter narrative to the secularist master narrative
that dominates both contemporary secular and
Christian ideas of humanism. Secondly, students
are encouraged to consider recovering Christian
humanism as a possible philosophy of culture that
could address the main malaise of our present
cultural predicament: an exhaustion of secular
reason on the one hand, and the resurgence of
religion (or at least its perception by secularist
scholars) on the other. For this purpose the course
draws on works from eastern and western
theologians to establish theologically the theme of
humanism as it arises from the Christology of the
early church and persists into works of modern
Catholic, Protestant, and eastern theology. All of
this study provides the student with a deep sense
that studying in the humanities may indeed be
linked directly to Christology and ecclesiology.

ENGL 630 Religion, Gender, and
Literature in Nineteenth-Century
Britain (3 sem. hrs.)
This course provides an intensive study of how
the writers of influential nineteenth century British
literary texts (including short and long poems, a
novella, novels, and prose non-fiction) chose to
portray the intersection of religious faith and
gender. This course not only familiarizes students
with the most significant nineteenth century
British authors, but also enables a thorough
exploration of two of the most prevalent areas of
debate in the nineteenth century: gender roles and
questions of faith. The course focuses on these
texts as literature, taking into consideration genre,
literary techniques, and audience, but the course as
a whole crosses disciplinary boundaries as
students read philosophical and historical writers
such as John Stuart Mill and John Ruskin.
Students also become familiar with the major
theoretical approaches applied to these texts by
contemporary literary critics.

ENGL 640 Science Fiction, 1600-1900:
A Literary Historical Perspective (3
sem. hrs.)
This course will provide an intensive study of
significant works of ‘science fiction’ written



                                                 213
between 1600 and 1900 from a literary historical
perspective.

ENGL 645 The Great Tradition:
Christian Thought in Western Literary
Classics (3 sem. hrs.)
Focuses on one overarching theme: how Christian
thought is embedded in some of the greatest
literary classics of the Western World, selected
from the Patristic period up to the twentieth
century. These include such diverse genres as St.
Augustine’s autobiographical ruminations in his
Confessions; Dante’s Divine Comedy; Shakespeare’s
Hamlet; Milton’s Paradise Lost; Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s
Progress; Goethe’s Faust; Hardy’s Tess of the
d’Urbervilles; and T.S. Eliot’s Murder in the Cathedral.
This course deals with questions such as: What are
we referring to when we speak of the mind? What
is the nature of the human mind? Does it have a
nature? Does it exist as something separate from
the human brain? Is it a property of the human
brain? Is it identical to the human brain? Or is it
merely an abbreviated way of talking about bodily
behaviours? More particularly, how is our
phenomenologically rich and existentially
weighted point of view on the world related to the
neurophysiological conditions that underwrite it
(or as one writer put it, “how is the water of the
brain transubstantiated into the wine of
consciousness?”)? How does the way we
understand the answers to these questions inform
the Christian belief that humans bear God’s
image? And how does theology bear on our
understanding of our bodies’ relationship to our
minds?

ENGL 650 The Writings of C.S. Lewis
(3 sem. hrs.)
The impact of prominent Inklings author C.S.
Lewis continues to grow, garnering both applause
and, in other quarters, heavy criticism. Lewis is
lauded as an intellectual giant, a Christian
apologist without equal, and a gifted myth-maker,
but also identified as misogynistic, racist, sado-
masochistic, and enjoying violence. This course
focuses on the literary achievement of C.S. Lewis,
analyzing representative texts of his literary
criticism, poetry, essays, novels, fictional
narratives, and devotional writing, in order to
examine his mythopoeic vision and its
contribution to Christianity and culture. Through
close reading of the texts, and considering these in
relation to various forms of theoretical inquiry –
historical, sociological, psychological, gender
discourse, ecological, ethical and spiritual or
theological – students will engage in the critical
task of assessing the ongoing impact of the
writings of C.S. Lewis.



Foundations
FNDN 101 The Liberal Arts Journey (1
sem. hr.)
Students engage in inquiry and discussion of
concepts underpinning a Christian liberal arts
education; explore TWU’s unique core curriculum
and Student Learning Outcomes; practice
strategies to confidently navigate their university
journey; and develop an educational plan to guide
their academic decision-making.

Prerequisite(s): None.

FNDN 102 Human Flourishing (3
sem. hr.)
This course is organized around the theme of
integrated personal wellbeing and human
flourishing. Students will explore adaptive social,
physical, spiritual and psychological strategies that
promote human thriving. A strong emphasis will
be placed upon positive and holistic strategies that
fully develop and celebrate our being human as an
integral part of divine creation. Students will
construct a personal architecture of wellbeing that
incorporates environmental and cultural factors.

Prerequisite(s): FNDN 101

FNDN 201 Ideas That Inspire (3 sem.
hrs.)
A “big question” launches students into
foundational inquiries from various disciplines and
perspectives. The instructor provides an overview
and background for each prompt and highlights
the method of inquiry. Building on this, students
work together with the guidance of the instructor
to explore, discuss, and analyze documents,
speeches, artifacts, performances, and arts (ancient
through contemporary) that create an intersection



                                                 214
of voices. Students develop their own conclusions
on the answer to the central question.
Prerequisite(s): FNDN 102.



French
NOTE: regarding all French courses: After consulting
with the French program coordinator
(sean.allison@twu.ca), students may begin one level below
that for which they qualify if they have not taken French
for several years, or if they lack confidence in the adequacy
of their preparation. Placement tests may be given to
determine a student’s level.

FREN 101, 102 Introduction to French
(3 sem. hrs.)
Courses provide an introduction to the French
language and culture for those with no or very
little French (nothing higher than high school
French 10). Through intensive work in grammar,
conversation, vocabulary building, and basic
reading, as well as through online work and videos
that accompany the text, students develop oral
and written skills and are introduced to various
aspects of French culture.

Prerequisite(s): None; FREN 101 is a
prerequisite for FREN 102. (3-1; 3-1)

FREN 111, 112 Intermediate French (3
sem. hrs.)
Courses improve the student’s command of oral
and written French by reviewing previous
knowledge and introducing new grammar
structures and readings with a cultural content.
Students receive intensive practice in reading,
writing, speaking and aural comprehension, and
develop their knowledge of the language largely
through a communicative approach.

Prerequisite(s): Grade 11 French or FREN 102.
FREN 111 is a prerequisite for FREN 112.
Students with a Grade 12 average in French of
less than 75% may take FREN 111 with
permission. (3-1; 3-1)

FREN 203, 204 Conversational and
Written French (3 sem. hrs.)
Conversational courses aimed at developing
greater fluency in the spoken language through the
study of society and culture, as well as language.
The emphasis is on developing oral skills,
including: improved grammar structures,
vocabulary, and pronunciation, aided by written
work. FREN 204 focuses on language for the
workplace or professional settings and is currently
offered in the summer, depending on demand.
Courses are conducted entirely in French.

NB: Courses are NOT intended for students with
Grade 12 French Immersion.
Prerequisite(s): Grade 12 French or FREN 112.

FREN 205, 206 Langue et introduction
à la littérature française (3 sem. hrs.)
Courses introduce students to French literature
through the study of various genres: short story,
poetry, novel, and theatre. Students improve their
language skills through reading, writing, and
discussion. As well, basic elements of French
grammar are thoroughly reviewed and
consolidated.

NB: Students whose Grade 12 average in French
is 75% or higher should register in FREN 205; if it
is lower than 75%, they may register in FREN 111
with permission.
Prerequisite(s): Grade 12 French or FREN 111,
112. FREN 205 is a prerequisite for FREN 206.

FREN 303 Conversation avancée (3
sem. hrs.)
Designed to provide intensive oral practice at the
advanced level through conversation, discussion,
debate, and oral presentations. Content focuses on
social issues of current interest, allowing students
to learn how to correctly express their opinions.
Various forms of media may be used such as
websites, television and film clips and magazine
articles. Students work on expressing their
thoughts accurately while integrating correct
grammatical principles and improving sentence
structure, vocabulary, and pronunciation.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 203, 204, or 206; or
Grade 12 French Immersion.

FREN 305, 306 Langue écrite et orale
(3 sem. hrs.)



                                                215
This course prepares students to go into more
advanced work in French by focusing on
grammar, reading, writing, and oral practice.
Besides intensive work in grammar, the study of
literature and other readings provides the basis for
discussion and composition, as well as the means
of acquiring vocabulary and cultural insights.

NB: These courses are prerequisites for all other
upper-level courses, except FREN 303. With
permission, certain upper-level courses may be
taken concurrently with FREN 305, 306.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 206. FREN 305 is a
prerequisite for FREN 306.

FREN 318 Le modernisme en
littérature et en art (3 sem. hrs.)
This course focuses on French literature, culture,
and society in the latter part of the nineteenth
century and the beginning of the twentieth
century. It introduces students to early modernism
in French poetry and prose, while presenting
parallels in art and architecture. Beginning with
such poets as Baudelaire, Rimbaud, Verlaine, and
Mallarmé, it shows how the concerns of the
symbolist poets and their precursors are reflected
in Impressionist art. Apollinaire’s poetry is
examined in relation to early twentieth century
society and developing art forms such as cubism
and surrealism. Novelists Marcel Proust and
André Gide are also studied as founding figures of
modernism.

NB: Offered alternating years.
Co-requisite(s): (with permission) FREN 306.

FREN 320 Littérature française du
XXe siècle (3 sem. hrs.)
Twentieth century literature as represented by the
works of major authors such as Camus, Sartre,
and Duras. Various works and literary movements
are examined in the light of their philosophical,
ideological, and historical contexts, as well as their
spiritual implications. Students reflect on
underlying issues reflected in these works from a
biblical perspective.

NB: Offered alternating years.
Co-requisite(s): (with permission) FREN 306.
(3-0 or 3-0)
FREN 321, 322 Littérature française du
Moyen Age au XIXe siècle (3 sem.
hrs.)
A survey of French literature from the Middle
Ages to the nineteenth century, through the study
of specific texts and literary excerpts. Courses
focus on various time periods and movements
including classicism, romanticism, and realism.
FREN 321 covers to the end of the seventeenth
century. FREN 322 deals with the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries and includes a look at the
French Revolution and Enlightenment thinkers.

NB: Offered alternating years.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 306; and FREN 318 or
320 or instructor’s permission. (3-0; 3-0)

FREN 340 Littérature francophone (3
sem. hrs.)
Course introduces students to the history and
literature of the francophone world, including
such regions as Africa, the Caribbean, and
Vietnam. Problems of colonization,
decolonization, and national identity are examined
through literature.

Prerequisite(s): FREN 306.

FREN 350 Civilisation française (3
sem. hrs.)
An overview of French civilization, highlighting
important aspects of French life today and over
the centuries. Through a mainly historical
approach, major developments in government,
society, and the arts (including architecture) are
examined, while the basic geographical features of
France are noted, and cultures of the various
regions are explored.

NB: Usually offered alternating years.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 306. (3-0 or 3-0)

FREN 360 Grammaire française
avancée (3 sem. hrs.)
An advanced course designed to give students a
thorough review of French grammar while
emphasizing the structure of the language.
Students learn to identify all parts of speech and
analyze sentences grammatically. Through
numerous written exercises, students significantly



                                               216
improve their grammatical skills, including verb
usage.

NB: Offered alternating years.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 306. (3-0 or 3-0)

FREN 370 Style et composition (3
sem. hrs.)
Designed to give advanced students intensive
practice in written French through various types
of composition as well as stylistic exercises.
Students work on improving vocabulary,
grammar, and syntax, while focusing on different
writing styles, including argumentative texts and
various forms of creative writing. A variety of
articles and short literary texts are used to provide
models and examples.

NB: Offered alternating years.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 306; FREN 360 strongly
recommended. (3-0 or 3-0)

FREN 380 Phonétique et
prononciation (3 sem. hrs.)
Course in French phonetics and pronunciation,
providing intensive language practice through a
study of the mechanisms of pronunciation and
numerous applied exercises, both oral and written.
Students improve their accent, intonation, and
speech patterns, while also learning the
International Phonetic Alphabet as it applies to
French.

NB: Not offered every year. Normally offered
during summer sessions. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 306. (3-0 or 3-0)

FREN 420 Littérature québécoise (3
sem. hrs.)
An overview of the traditional themes of French-
Canadian literature followed by an intensive study
of the works of several modern Québécois
authors, revealing an evolving society through the
texts.

NB: Offered alternating years.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 306; and one of FREN
318, 320, 321 or 322. (3-0 or 3-0)
FREN 430 Littérature féminine
d’expression française (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of selected works of well-known French
and francophone women writers, including a
discussion of the themes, major concerns, and
importance of their works.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 306; and one of FREN
318, 320, 321 or 322. (3-0 or 3-0)

FREN 450 Études dirigées en
littérature ou en culture françaises (3
sem. hrs.)
With permission from the department, a student
may do a directed study in a specific area of
French literature or culture, accompanied by
various assignments, essays, and an oral and
written exam.

Prerequisite(s): FREN 306; and an upper-level
French literature course; and third or fourth year
standing.



Game Development
GAME 110 Introduction to Game
Development (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to the processes of game
development, whether technical, artistic,
managerial, or fiscal. Students will engage theory,
investigate tools, and learn systems necessary for
them to successfully participate in development
projects in subsequent years.

Prerequisite(s): None.
GAME 140 Introduction to Game
Design (3 sem. hrs.)
An intelligent, playful course in which students
will apply the history, theory and practice of game
design to the creation of games. While the material
of this course is relevant to video game design,
students will primarily focus on board and card
games.

Cross-listed: MCOM 140
Prerequisite(s): None.



                                                 217
GAME 160 Introduction to the Video
Game Industry (3 sem. hrs.)
An overview of the business aspects of making
and marketing video games. Students will
investigate a wide variety of issues, processes, and
forces in the games industry, including marketing,
budgeting, contracting, and laws pertinent to game
production. Student research of contemporary and
historical business models for making games will
be particularly important, as will be the critical,
faith‐based evaluation of current labour practices
and other business‐related ethical issues facing the
games industry.

Prerequisite(s): None.

GAME 231 Foundations of Animation
(3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to the foundational principles and
practices of animation. While students will focus
on 2D animation in frequent practical exercises,
their acquired skills and theory will be
foundational for doing 3D animation. This course
is a prerequisite for any subsequent animation
courses.

Cross-listed: ART 231
Prerequisite(s): ART 181 or 182 or 250.

GAME 232 Foundations of 3D
Graphics (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to the foundational principles and
practices of 3D computer animation. Working in a
lab setting, students will develop the basic
conceptual and technical tools necessary to create
and modify elements for game development.

Cross-listed: ART 232
Prerequisite(s): GAME/ART 231.

GAME 240 Game Design for Video
Games (3 sem. hrs.)
A continuation of GAME 140 “Introduction to
Game Design.” Students focus on applying game
design principles explicitly to the video game
medium. By engaging in constant design projects
and exercises, students will broaden their
knowledge of design theory and develop the
necessary skills to rapidly prototype and test game
design ideas.
Cross-listed: MCOM 240.
Prerequisite(s): GAME/MCOM 140.

GAME 260 Project Management (3
sem. hrs.)
An introduction to project management with a
focus on making video games. Students will study
and critically evaluate key project management
concepts, issues, and procedures, such as different
development methodologies, project scheduling,
effective communication, workplace ethics, and
team building.

Prerequisite(s): None.

GAME 290 Game Development Project
(3 sem. hrs.)
A project-based course in which teams of students
will work together to create and release simple
video games. Each student will contribute on the
basis of their specialized training to this point in
the program. This is the first of three Game
Development project courses, and its primary goal
is to introduce students to the experience of
working on video games.

Prerequisite(s): GAME 110 and one of GAME
140, ART 250, MUSI 340, CMPT 166, BUSI 121
or 231.

GAME 320 Video Game Sound and
Music (3 sem. hrs.)
A survey of the history and current use of sound
and music in video games. Students will
investigate how audio in video games is unique
and where it draws on other media, as well as
learn about the tools and best practices used in the
creation of sound and music in video games.
Through this study, students will become more
aesthetically informed critics of the use of audio in
video games.

Cross-Listed: MUSI 355.
Prerequisite(s): Second year standing or higher.

GAME 321 Sound Design (3 sem. hrs.)
Covers the core components of effective sound
design, such as sound effects, voice recording, and
mixing. This is a hands-on studio-based course in
which students will engage in frequent hands-on
exercises and in-class activities in order to prepare


                                                 218
them to contribute the non-musical audio
elements necessary for video game development.
Students who are not part of the Game
Development program will also benefit from
taking this course, as it is also applicable to non-
game forms of media production.

Cross-Listed: MUSI 356.
Prerequisite(s): MCOM 323/MUSI 340.

GAME 322 Advanced Sound Design (3
sem. hrs.)
Continues the topics of GAME 321 “Sound
Design,” goes deeper in those topics (sound
effects, voice recording, mixing), and adds an
extra emphasis on studio direction. This is a
hands-on studio-based course in which students
will engage in frequent hands-on exercises and in-
class activities in order to gain the skills and
aesthetic judgment necessary to excel in their
creation of non-music audio elements of video
games. Students who are not part of the Game
Development program will also benefit from
taking this course, as it is also applicable to non-
game forms of media production.

Cross-Listed: MUSI 357.
Prerequisite(s): GAME 321/MUSI 356.

GAME 323 Interactive Sound Design
(3 sem. hrs.)
Covers the issues and technologies unique to
creating and deploying sound and music for video
games and other interactive digital media. In this
studio-based course, students will engage in
frequent exercises and projects in order to develop
the advanced knowledge, aesthetic judgment, and
digital audio skills that will help these students
contribute effectively to sound design in Game
Development projects. Students must have at least
a basic understanding of programming to
participate in this course.

Cross-Listed: MUSI 358.
Prerequisite(s): GAME 321/MUSI 356; CMPT
140.

GAME 331 Video Game Art (3 sem.
hrs.)
A critical evaluation of the deployment of visual
art in video games. Students will develop a broad
appreciation for the incredible variety of video
game art and consider the spiritual, moral, and
ethical issues surrounding visual design choices in
game development. Students will engage theories
and tools that will enhance student participation in
development projects.

Cross-Listed: ART 331.
Prerequisite(s): Second year standing or higher.

GAME 332 Advanced Animation
Projects (3 sem. hrs.)
A continuation of the foundational animation
courses. Students will research animation
techniques and aesthetics and then develop a plan
in consultation with the instructor for a semester-
long project. Students will build on their existing
animation skills and aesthetic judgement as well as
gain a wider appreciation for what is possible with
animation, whether computerized or otherwise.

Cross-Listed: ART 332
Prerequisite(s): GAME/ART 232.

GAME 340 Advanced Game Design (3
sem. hrs.)
An in-depth look at game design theory and
aesthetic criticism pertaining to video games.
Through the use of significant projects, students
will further develop practical design skills, and
investigate theoretical topics such as the ability of
games to communicate, simulate, and persuade.
Students will examine the connections between
game design and faith, spirituality, ethics, morality,
and the Christian tradition in order to become
game designers who are thoughtful shapers of
culture rather than simply entertainment
technicians.

Cross-listed: MCOM 340.
Prerequisite(s): GAME/MCOM 240.

GAME 341 Interactive Storytelling (3
sem. hrs.)
An in-depth look at the various forms of writing
for video games. Students will study and practice
game story scripting, writing for interface,
dialogue and narration, as well as video game
technical writing. Students will develop skills to
handle the many writing tasks necessary for a
game development project. Students who are not


                                                  219
part of the Game Development program will also
benefit from taking this course, as it is also
applicable to non-game forms of media
production.

Cross-listed: MCOM 341.
Prerequisite(s): One of ENGL 207, 208, MCOM
261, 351, 361, 362, 461.

GAME 350 Video Game Programming
(3 sem. hrs.)
An in-depth hands-on study of the technologies
critical to game development. Through frequent
exercises and projects, students will develop the
skills and knowledge necessary to program video
games—most importantly, the game engines
currently employed by the TWU Game
Development Program. Student software
developers will study industry best practices and
critically consider how best to do their work with
the highest ethical and moral standards.

Prerequisite(s): CMPT 166, 231.

GAME 351 Artificial Intelligence for
Video Games (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of the application of Artificial Intelligence
(AI) to video games. Students will investigate the
theory behind effective AI in games, and with
frequent exercises and projects will practice
programming AI as much as possible. Student
software developers will gain the abilities
necessary to make key contributions to creation of
video games in the Game Development project
courses.

Prerequisite(s): CMPT 166, 231.

GAME 360 The Business of Video
Games (3 sem. hrs.)
An overview of business practices unique to the
video game industry, including finance, marketing,
management, intellectual property, and business
models. In short, students will develop the
knowledge and skills necessary to run the business
aspects of the Game Development Project
courses. Students will also critically examine
ethical and moral issues in the games industry.

Cross-listed: BUSI 360.
Prerequisite(s): GAME 110. BUSI 111 also
required for students in the Marketing &
Management Stream.

GAME 380 Game Development Field
Placement (1-3 sem. hrs.)
Game Development students engage in practical
work experience with game development
companies. Students will primarily learn through
doing work for a professional company, but they
will also have readings and class discussions on
preparation for professional careers. Students
should take this course near the end of the
program so that they have developed sufficient
skills to be valuable contributors in a professional
workplace.

Prerequisite(s): Minimum third year standing in
the Game Development program.

GAME 390 Game Development Project
II (3 sem. hrs.)
An intermediate project-based course in which
teams of students will work together to create and
release video games that are more advanced and
polished than the projects from GAME 290. Each
student will contribute on the basis of their
specialized training to this point in the program.
This is the first course of a two-part project
course that will run for two semesters during the
students’ third year.

Prerequisite(s): GAME 290.

GAME 391 Game Development Project
II (3 sem. hrs.)
An intermediate project-based course in which
teams of students will work together to create and
release video games that are more advanced and
polished than the projects from GAME 290. Each
student will contribute on the basis of their
specialized training to this point in the program.
This is the second course of a two-part project
course that will run for two semesters during the
students’ third year.

Prerequisite(s): GAME 390.

GAME 470 User Experience Design (3
sem. hrs.)


                                                 220
An in-depth examination of the principles of user
experience design and how they apply to game
development. Students will engage a wide range of
theory in psychology, sociology, art, and
interdisciplinary design thinking that is relevant to
structuring the game environments and interface
game players encounter. Both technically- and
artistically-inclined designers will engage in
challenging readings, exercises and projects so that
they are ready to contribute significantly to the
Game Development project courses.

Prerequisite(s): CMPT 385 or GAME 323 or
ART 250 or GAME 240 or GAME 471, and at
least third year standing.

GAME 471 Video Game Aesthetics (3
sem. hrs.)
An advanced consideration of aesthetic theory
relevant to video games. Students will investigate
the unique expressive, creative and artistic aspects
of video games, and will search for and critically
the best works of this relatively young medium.
Students will use case studies and advanced
theories in Game Studies and other artistic
disciplines in order to expand the students’
capacity to make video games with artistic
integrity.

Prerequisite(s): MCOM 312.

GAME 490 Game Development Project
III (3 sem. hrs.)
An advanced project-based course in which teams
of students will work together to create and
release ambitious video games. Students will
contribute on the basis of their specialized training
to this point in the program. This is the first
course of a two-part project course that will run
for two semesters during the students’ last year.
The course is the capstone of the Game
Development program.

Prerequisite(s): GAME 391.

GAME 491 Game Development Project
III (3 sem. hrs.)
An advanced project-based course in which teams
of students will work together to create and
release ambitious video games. Students will
contribute on the basis of their specialized training
to this point in the program. This is the second
course of a two-part project course that will run
for two semesters during the students’ last year.
The course is the capstone of the Game
Development program.

Prerequisite(s): GAME 490.



Geography and
Environment
NOTE: In addition to the GENV courses listed below,
students in environmental studies, geography, biology, and
chemistry can find more GENV/AS courses under the
Au Sable Institute Courses section of the academic
calendar.

GENV 109 Introduction to Physical
Geology (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to the materials and processes of
the physical earth: rocks and minerals, earth
structure and composition, plate tectonics,
volcanology, seismology, crustal deformation,
weathering and erosion, slope movement,
sedimentation, wind and water processes,
glaciation, and geologic time. Earth materials and
processes are studied in the laboratory and in the
field. This course is an environmental studies core
requirement.

Cross-listed: GEOL 109.
Prerequisite(s): None. (3-3; 0-0)

GENV 111 Human Geography and
Global Change (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to human geography and the
notion of globalization by exploring some of the
major economic, political, social, cultural,
environmental, and technological changes that
have recently occurred at the global level and are
shaping local places. The course is designed to
provide students with better understanding of the
variation, interaction, and interdependence of
places, regions, people and their environments in a
globalizing world; and to demonstrate how human
geographers might consider and examine the
concepts, forces, processes, issues, and ideas that
are associated with global transformation.


                                                       221
Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0; 0-0)

GENV 121 Introduction to Earth
Systems Science (3 sem. hrs.)
Through an investigation of the fundamental
concepts of earth systems science from a
geographic perspective, students will develop
confidence in using the scientific method.
Emphasis in the course is placed on
understanding the origins and development of
Earth’s surface features; the characteristics and
circulations of Earth’s atmosphere, including
weather systems and global climates; and
introducing the biophysical principles governing
vegetation distribution patterns on Earth. Lab
exercises will provide students hands-on
opportunities to further develop their scientific
literacy as it relates to earth systems science and
beyond. This course is primarily intended for non-
science majors.

Prerequisite(s): None. (3-2; 3-2)

GENV 131 Global Environment Issues
(3 sem. hrs.)
An investigation of the scientific principles behind
environmental issues and practical inquiry-based
approaches to environment concerns in our local
and global communities. The course integrates
theoretical knowledge about the environment with
real-life activities in a multitude of settings outside
of the classroom to help students learn about
complex interactions between human populations
and their environments; and to inspire critical
thinking about environmental challenges for today
and future generations.

Prerequisite(s): None. (0-0; 3-0)

GENV 182 Digital Earth
Principles of spatial and digital literacy applied to
the geographic context of our contemporary
world. In this course, students will discover the
importance of place, spatial data collection,
assessment of spatial patterns and principles of
scale. Students will gain an understanding of the
nature of geospatial data, and explore geospatial
technologies such as GPS, mobile maps, satellite
data and GIS. Students will discover digital
cartography principles and spatial analysis
techniques. Students will learn about applications
of citizen science, digital humanitarianism, and
responding to humanitarian needs and crises
through geospatial technologies.

Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0; 0-0)

GENV 212 Urbanization Issues of
Developing Countries (3 sem. hrs.)
This course explores urbanization processes in
developing countries, particularly in urban settings
across Africa, Asia, and Latin America. It provides
a geographic perspective on the socio-economic,
political, cultural, and environmental conditions
under which cities of the Third World are rapidly
growing and their relation to globalization issues.
Case studies from selected areas examine such
problems as unemployment, inadequate health
services, housing shortages, and inadequate urban
infrastructure.

Prerequisite(s): None. (0-0; 3-0)

GENV 216 Plant Environments (3 sem.
hrs.)
An inventory of plant life across major habitats -
particularly in the local area of British Columbia -
this course provides insights into the ecology of
these environments. Local field trips highlight
natural habitats, agricultural and horticultural
crops, and managed forests. Critical assessment of
planetary stewardship forms a common theme.

NB: Summer sessions only. Includes field work in
the Gulf Islands. Not offered every year. See
department chair.
Cross-listed: BIOL 216.
Prerequisite(s): Instructor’s consent.

GENV 220 Geology of the Vancouver
Region (3 sem. hrs.)
An overview of the fundamental earth science
processes responsible for the creation,
transformation, and ongoing physical
development of the Pacific Northwest. These
processes are studied in the context of the
building of the North American continent
through tectonic forces and surface dynamics.
Topics include geologic time, tectonics,
volcanology, seismology, stratigraphy, glaciation,
erosion, paleontology, paleoclimatology, and



                                                   222
environmental issues. Field trips and field studies
are included.
Cross-listed: GEOL 220.
Prerequisite(s): None. (0-0; 3-0)

GENV 230 Geography of Canada (3
sem. hrs.)
This course describes and explores Canada’s
physical and human geography focusing on the
regional distribution of natural features and
resources, population and settlements, economic
activities and development, and cultural change. It
emphasizes the diversity and interrelationships
between the physical and human landscapes which
have evolved over time, creating the identifiable
regions and subregions within the country.

Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0; 3-0)

GENV 231 Environmental Philosophy
(3 sem. hrs.)
An overview of the various perspectives put
forward in the West on the proper human
relationship to the environment. We will
investigate the metaphysics behind the fact/value
dichotomy, the currently influential views on the
human‐nature relationship, various environmental
ethical frameworks, the distinctive characteristics
of moral reasoning and argumentation as they
bear on the human‐nature relationship, and the
religious, economic, socio‐cultural, and ideological
factors contributory to the rise of the ecological
crisis. We conclude by critically interrogating the
conceptual substructures of some popular
contemporary environmental frameworks.

Cross-listed: PHIL 231.
Prerequisite(s): None.

GENV 262 Marine Biology (3 sem.
hrs.)
A study of the life history and distribution of
marine organisms in several major habitat types,
including soft sediment and rocky substrate
communities. Emphasis is on field and laboratory
work in a survey of common local marine plants
and animals and their relationships. Includes field
work in the Lower Mainland, Gulf Islands, and/or
Vancouver Island.
NB: Summer sessions only. Not offered every
year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: BIOL 262.
Prerequisite(s): Instructor’s consent.

GENV 281 General Ecology (3 sem.
hrs.)
A study of the structure and dynamics of
ecosystems. Consideration of plant and animal
populations in relation to physical, chemical, and
biological factors affecting their interaction and
productivity. Considerable laboratory time is
devoted to the study of local ecosystems, field
sampling techniques, and field trips to ecological
research areas.

Cross-listed: BIOL 281.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 103, 104, and 105; or
BIOL 113 and 114; or equivalent. (0-0; 3-3)

GENV 282 Geographic Information
Systems (3 sem. hrs.)
Students are invited into understanding and using
quantitative and computational inquiry to
understand and discern computer-based spatial
analysis as a mode of inquiry. Students develop
confidence in using Geographic Information
Systems (GIS) and accompanying computer-
based, spatial analytical tools to model geographic
problems using mathematical and computing
notation. Students are provided with the
opportunity to investigate the theory and practical
utility of GIS through collecting empirical spatial
data, analyzing quantitative data, conducting
computational spatial analyses to answer
meaningful geographic and environmental
questions, making judgements based on
quantitative information derived from these
analyses, and communicating the results with
purposeful, multi-audience cartographic products.

Prerequisite(s): None. (0-0; 3-2)

GENV 312 Wilderness, Water, and
Global Warming: Canadian
Environmental History (3 sem. hrs.)
A thematic case study approach to Canadian
Environmental History that highlights the nation’s
unique reciprocal relationships with nature as
illustrated through ideas (Wilderness), material
resources (Water) and social/ethical issues (Global


                                                223
Warming). Investigates how “natural” elements
like climate, topography, plants, animals, and
diseases have influenced our choices about nature,
and how “cultural” content, like “clean/green”
energy initiatives, pipeline projects, save the whale
campaigns, and fear of climate change, have
shaped our perceptions of the places we inhabit.
Critically engages the ethical decisions we make
about the environment that may determine the
future we wish to construct as Canadian and
global citizens.

NB: Offered every other year.
Cross-listed: HIST 339.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of geography and
environment including one of GENV 111, 131,
212, or 230, or instructor’s consent. (0-0; 3-0)

GENV 316 Plant Ecology (3 sem. hrs.)
The crucial role of plant ecology in shaping major
habitats, including those in British Columbia, will
be examined. A trip to Salt Spring Island will
highlight the threatened Garry oak ecosystem and
other features of interest. Field trips throughout
the course will highlight the population dynamics
and interrelationships of plant communities in
natural habitats, agricultural crops, and managed
forests. Critical assessment of planetary
stewardship will form a common theme across
various issues in plant ecology.

NB: Summer sessions only. Offered every other
year.
Cross-listed: BIOL 318.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 103, 104, and 105; or
BIOL 113, 114. (0-0; 3-0)

GENV 318 Tropical Botany (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course explores the botanical riches of the
tropics, focusing on the plant life of Hawaii. The
course traces fundamentals of plant taxonomy,
physiology, and ecology in relation to complexities
of existence on the most isolated island chain in
the world. Issues related to indigenous vegetation
including effects of introduced animals and plants,
agriculture and ethnobotany will be discussed. The
course will involve one week of lectures at Trinity
Western University Langley campus and two
weeks of lectures and field work in the Hawaiian
Islands.
NB: Offered every other year.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 103, 104, and 105; or
BIOL 113, 114 and instructor’s consent.
Recommended: BIOL 216 or 312 or 314 or
BIOL/GENV 316.

GENV 320 Geomorphology (3 sem.
hrs.)
A scientific examination of the physical processes
which shape landform development, structure,
and dynamics. Topics include weathering, slope
systems, fluvial and coastal environments, and
glacial and periglacial systems. Special emphasis is
placed on deciphering past events from current
landscape structures. Field trips and field studies
are required.

NB: Offered every other year.
Cross-listed: GEOL 320.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of geography and
environment including one of GENV 121, 131,
220; or GEOL 109 or 220; or instructor’s consent.
(3-2; 0-0)

GENV 321 Geography of Soils (3 sem.
hrs.)
A scientific investigation of the various aspects of
soil as a natural resource. Topics include: physical,
chemical, and biological characteristics of soils
applied in the context of soil formation, soil
classification and land use, agriculture, and
environmental engineering. Soil mapping and
spatial distribution of soils is also considered.
Field trips and field studies are required.

NB: Offered every other year.
Cross-listed: GEOL 321.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of geography and
environment including one of GENV 121, 131,
220; or GEOL 109 or 220; or instructor’s consent.
(3-3; 0-0)

GENV 322 Global Climate Change (3
sem. hrs.)
Students will investigate what are the scientific
principles and processes which govern natural and
human-induced climate change. Students will
gather evidence drawing on the latest research and
evolving pattern of scientific data that has
emerged on climate in recent years. Employing
scientific data, students will then be invited to


                                                 224
analyze the severity of climate change impacts on
a myriad of living and nonliving systems such as
arctic sea-ice, freshwater, terrestrial and marine
ecosystems; as well as analyzing the socio-
economic changes and adaptations that human
communities are making in response to Earth’s
changing climate.

NB: Offered every other year.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of geography and
environment including one of GENV 121, 131,
220; or GEOL 109 or 220; or instructor’s consent.
(0-0; 3-0)

GENV 331 Environmental Philosophy
(3 sem. hrs.)
Explores the theological and philosophical
dimensions of the doctrine of creation and from
there highlights the various philosophical shifts of
outlook that helped usher in modern naturalism
and its notions of nature. We will investigate the
metaphysics behind the fact/value dichotomy,
various environmental ethical frameworks, the
case for the moral status of non-human animals
and abiotic entities, the evolution of the ecological
crisis, the conceptual substructures of some
popular contemporary environmental frameworks,
and some of the agendas of response to our
current ecological crisis.

NB: PHIL/GENV 221 and PHIL/GENV 331
may not both be taken for credit.
Cross-listed: PHIL 331.
Prerequisite(s): Second year status; or
instructor’s permission. (3-0; 3-0)

GENV 331 Geography of Western
Canada (3 sem. hrs.)
This course provides an overview of the physical
and human geography that shapes and defines the
Prairie provinces and British Columbia. The
course focuses on selected cultural and
environmental factors in understanding the spatial
variation in population patterns and economic
activity. Emphasis is also placed on the role of
regional literature and painting in the formation of
regional images.

Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of geography and
environment including one of GENV 111, 131,
212, or 230; or instructor’s consent. (0-0; 3-0).
GENV 341 Resource and
Environmental Management (3 sem.
hrs.)
An introduction to key concepts and issues in
natural resources management. The course
examines major resource-based industries,
including agriculture, fishing, forestry, mining,
energy, and recreation. It also emphasizes
understanding the varied influences that
environmental, socio-economic, and political
factors have on the spatial distribution of resource
utilization and resource management.

NB: Offered every other year.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of geography and
environment including one of GENV 111, 131,
212, or 230; or instructor’s consent. (3-0; 0-0)

GENV 343 Geography of the Pacific
Rim (3 sem. hrs.)
This course examines the physical and human
geography of the Pacific Rim. It gives particular
attention to regional distribution of natural
features and resources, population and
settlements, economic activities and development,
as well as globalization and its impact on this
region. The Pacific Rim is a geographic realm that
has changed dramatically since the middle of the
twentieth century, therefore, this course explores
the dynamic issues, problems, and challenges
facing contemporary Pacific Rim countries, how
the issues are being addressed, and the future
prospects for the people and countries within this
region.

NB: Offered every other year. Fulfils area studies
requirements for International Studies
major/honours.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of geography and
environment including one of GENV 111, 131,
212, or 230; or instructor’s consent.

GENV 344 Geography of Africa (3
sem. hrs.)
This course examines the human and physical
geography of Africa. Attention is given to the
regional distribution of natural features and
resources, population and settlements, economic
activities and development, and globalization and
its impact on this vast continent. Because Africa is
a geographic realm that has changed dramatically


                                                225
since the middle of the twentieth century, this
course explores the dynamic issues, problems, and
challenges facing contemporary African societies,
how the issues are being addressed, and the future
prospects for the people and countries within this
geographic region.

NB: Offered every other year. Fulfils area studies
requirements for International Studies
major/honours.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of geography and
environment including one of GENV 111, 131,
212, or 230; or third year standing or instructor’s
consent. (3-0; 0-0)

GENV 354 Geography of the World
Economy (3 sem. hrs.)
This course introduces students to the
globalization of the world economy. It provides
theoretical and practical foundation for exploring
the global economy in an era of technological
advancements, restructuring economies, and
geopolitical realignments. It focuses on economic
development of developed and developing
countries of the world, and examine the impacts
and critical problems associated with economic
growth, development, and distribution and how to
address the problems.

NB: Offered every other year.
Cross-listed: ECON 354.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of geography and
environment including one of GENV 111, 131,
212, or 230; or third year standing in Economics/
Business, or instructor’s consent. (0-0; 3-0)

GENV 355 Geography of Urban Areas
(3 sem. hrs.)
This course focuses on the origin, physical
environment, and structure of urban settlements;
the growth and processes of urbanization; and the
impact of globalization on urban centres. It
investigates societal issues common to urban
environments including; poverty, homelessness,
substance abuse, criminality, environmental
degradation, and deterioration of the built
environment. It also provides an overview of
urban renewal and planning processes.

NB: Offered every other year.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of geography and
environment including one of GENV 111, 131,
212, or 230; or third year standing or instructor’s
consent. (3-0; 0-0)

GENV 356 Urban and Regional
Planning (3 sem. hrs.)
This course provides a comprehensive
introduction to the principles, problems, and
techniques of urban, suburban, rural, and regional
land use planning. It focuses on the elements and
make-up of the comprehensive plan, the politics
of planning, and the assessment of economic,
social and environmental plans.

NB: Offered every other year.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of geography and
environment including one of GENV 111, 212,
355, or third year standing or instructor’s consent.
(0-0; 3-0)

GENV 357 Environmental Economics
and Policy (3 sem. hrs.)
This course introduces the main concepts in
environmental economics and applies them to
public policy analysis. Students will learn about
markets, prices, and the role of information in the
economy, and will then learn about market failures
that specifically affect the environment. The
second half of the course introduces the key
techniques in public policy analysis (an inherently
interdisciplinary undertaking), including the
process of developing, implementing, and
assessing public policy.

Cross-listed: ECON 357.
Prerequisite(s): Third year standing or
instructor’s consent. (3-0; 3-0)

GENV 362 Marine Ecology (3 sem.
hrs.)
A study of the ecological relationships of marine
life in several major habitat types. Emphasis is on
productivity, food webs, nutrient cycling, and
community ecology. Ecosystem parameters are
investigated through field and laboratory studies.
Part of coursework takes place in the Lower
Mainland, Gulf Islands, and/or Vancouver Island.

NB: Summer sessions only. Not offered every
year. See department chair.


                                                 226
Cross-listed: BIOL 362.
Prerequisite(s): Advanced standing in biology
and instructor’s consent.
Recommended: BIOL 308 and/or 360.

GENV 364 Coral Reef Ecology (3 sem.
hrs.)
A field course focusing on the systematics and
ecology of tropical coral reef organisms. Plants,
animals, and physical factors of a fringing coral
reef are examined through snorkeling excursions
and laboratory studies. One species is chosen for a
detailed research project. Includes field course
work in Hawaii.

NB: Summer sessions only. Not offered every
year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: BIOL 364.
Prerequisite(s): Advanced standing in biology
and instructor’s consent.
Recommended: BIOL 262, 308, 360 and/or 382.

GENV 372, 373 Internship/Practicum
(3 sem. hrs. each)
This internship course gives students an
opportunity to apply the knowledge and skills
acquired in the classroom to a real-world work
environment. The course is an efficient way to
hone students’ practical skills in spatial
information science (SIS) and analysis within the
realms of geography, environmental science,
and/or geographic information systems (GIS)
helping them gain valuable work experience by
learning new skills, gaining new perspectives in
integrating SIS, exploring the SIS work
environment, and networking with the experts in
this field. This practicum is offered as a tripartite
arrangement that includes: the student, the
University’s course instructor/program
coordinator, and the approved practicum
supervisor in a reputable government department,
business, or non-profit/non-governmental
organization.

NB: Pass/Fail course. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): Third year standing with a
minimum of 9 sem. hrs. of geography and
environment including two of GENV 111, 121,
131, 212, 282, or instructor’s consent.
GENV 374, 375 Environmental Studies
Internship (3 sem. hrs. each)
This internship/practicum course gives students
an opportunity to apply the knowledge and skills
acquired in the classroom to a real-world work
environment. The course is an efficient way to
hone students’ practical skills in scientific and
social scientific analysis within the realm of
environmental science/studies helping them gain
valuable work experience by learning new skills,
gaining new perspectives in areas such as
environmental assessment and ecological analyses,
and networking with the experts in this field. This
practicum is offered as a tripartite arrangement
that includes the student, the University’s course
instructor/program coordinator, and the
approved practicum supervisor in a reputable
government department, business, or non-
profit/non-governmental organization.

Prerequisite(s): Third year standing with a
minimum of 9 sem. hrs. towards an GENV
degree including two of BIOL 113, CHEM 101 or
111, GENV 121, and GENV 131; or instructor’s
consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

GENV 382 Applied Geographic
Information Systems (3 sem. hrs.)
This course focuses on the utility of Geographic
Information Systems in problem solving and
decision-making in real world settings. Students
are expected to complete a major term project in
consultation with the instructor.

NB: Offered every other year.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of geography and
environment including GENV 282, or instructor’s
consent. (0-0; 3-2)

GENV 383 Geographic Data Analysis
(3 sem. hrs.)
Geography is an integrative spatial science that
attempts to explain and predict the spatial
distributions and variation of human activity and
physical features on the Earth’s surface.
Geographers and Environmental scientists greatly
benefit from the use of quantitative and
computational analyses to help answer where,
why, and what-to-do questions. Geographers
might explore such questions as: what type of
municipal transportation policy might best achieve


                                               227
more equitable access for urban residents to city
services and facilities? Environmental scientists
might ask: what sort of land use decisions are
required to balance sustainable economic
development with protection of wetlands in a
fragile ecosystem? Students are invited into
understanding and using statistical analysis as a
means to develop a quantitative and
computational inquiry.

NB: Offered every other year.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of geography and
environment. (0-0; 3-2)

GENV 391, 392 Directed Studies in
Geography and Environment (3 sem.
hrs.)
In special cases, with the instructor’s consent,
students may pursue an independent but guided
reading and research course in a specialized area
of geography of interest to students.

Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of geography and
environment, and instructor’s consent. See
geography and environment coordinator. (3-0 or
3-0)

GENV 395 Central America Field
Study (3 sem. hrs.)
This experiential and interdisciplinary course
fosters interaction with diverse physical and
human environments. It provides exposure to the
region’s history, religions, politics, and socio-
economic realities that shape the communication
and cultures of Central America, and introduces
students to cross-cultural communication.

Cross-listed: MCOM 395.
Prerequisite(s): Third year standing or instructor
permission. (3-0 or 3-0).

GENV 396 East Africa Field Study (3
sem. hrs.)
This experiential and interdisciplinary course
fosters interaction with diverse physical and
human environments. It provides exposure to the
region’s history, religions, politics, and socio-
economic realities that shape the communication
and cultures of East Africa and introduces
students to cross-cultural communication.
Cross-listed: MCOM 396.
Prerequisite(s): Third year standing or instructor
permission. (3-0 or 3-0)

GENV 400 Special Topics in
Geography and Environment (3 sem.
hrs.)
A study of special topics or issues in geography
and environment that are not considered in-depth
in other courses.

NB: Not offered every year. See geography and
environment coordinator.

GENV 409 Thesis Preparation (1 sem.
hr.)
Students are required to choose a topic for their
senior thesis (GENV 410) in consultation with an
instructor. Selected readings and references
pertinent to the topic are assigned. A final written
and oral report is presented consisting of a
detailed thesis proposal and a literature review.
Students are advised to start in their third year to
allow observations over a full calendar year.

Prerequisite(s): Advanced standing in geography
and environment studies or instructor’s consent.
(1-0; 0-0)

GENV 410 Senior Thesis (2 sem. hrs.)
Research in a chosen area of environmental
studies with a final written report. Presentation of
research findings are also made by the student in a
seminar.

NB: Normally 2 sem. hrs. are assigned unless
arrangements are made with the department chair.
Prerequisite(s): GENV 409, a related directed
study in preparation, or instructor’s consent. (0-0;
1-2)

GENV 411 Rural Development (3 sem.
hrs.)
The course is designed to introduce students to
the broad concept of rural development, to the
relationship between rural communities and their
environments, and to the critical issues of rural
restructuring and sustainability. This course
examines the theoretical underpinnings, principles,
and practices of rural development as well as the



                                                 228
problems and challenges facing rural communities
in both developed and developing countries. It is
expected that, by the end of the course, students
gain and/or broaden their knowledge of
contemporary domestic and international rural
development processes, practices, and issues.

NB: Offered every other year.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of geography and
environment, third or fourth year standing, or
instructor’s consent. (0-0; 3-0)

GENV 412 Senior Thesis (3 sem. hrs.)
Research in a chosen area of environmental
studies with a final written report. Students
present research findings in a seminar. Allows
students with larger projects to gain extra credit.

NB: Normally 3 sem. hrs. are assigned unless
arrangements are made with the department chair.
Prerequisite(s): GENV 409, a related directed
study in preparation, or instructor’s consent. (0-0;
1-2)

GENV 414 Nature, Society, and
History in Global Perspective (3 sem.
hrs.)
Human interaction with the environment is the
most fundamental of all relationships. This course
examines the different ways in which societies
have defined, understood, and used their non-
human surroundings and the processes through
which the environment influences culture and
adapts to human communities. Students explore
the historical context of the human-nature
interaction in global perspective and compare the
ways in which the concepts of politics,
nationalism, race, ethnicity, gender, religion, etc.
inform and guide the relationship.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: HIST 409.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history; third or
fourth year standing; or instructor’s consent. (3-0;
0-0)

GENV 442 Environmental Thought (3
sem. hrs.)
A survey of the origin and development of those
streams of geographic thought reflecting people’s
relationship to the natural environment. The
course includes discussions within the context of
Christian and non-Christian alternatives, of the
development of a responsible Christian
environmental ethic, and its application to global
environmental issues.

NB: Offered every other year.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of geography and
environment, third or fourth year standing, or
instructor’s consent. (3-0; 0-0)

GENV 482 Geovisualization and
Analysis (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to the underlying principles and
methods of 3D modeling within ArcGIS 3D
Analyst. It provides experience with 3DE tools as
well as opportunities for practical, real-life
applications through a series of examples and
exercises, which include constructing the 3D
environment/landscape, analyzing spatial data,
and creating outputs (e.g., 3D maps), based on
real-life modeling examples such as urban
landscapes, parks, business locations, and housing.

Prerequisite(s): GENV 282 or instructor’s
consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

GENV 484 Conservation Biology (3
sem. hrs.)
An exploration of various practical applications of
biology in environmental management,
monitoring, and remediation. Topics include many
important areas of concern such as wildlife
management, fisheries, forestry, agriculture, water
and air pollution, and protection of endangered
ecosystems. Various biological approaches to
these are considered, such as population
modelling, ecophysiology, microbiology
techniques, biomonitoring, ecosystem health, and
biodiversity inventories. The implications of
environmental ethics and the role of Christian
environmental stewardship are discussed.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: BIOL 484.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 281(may be taken
concurrently). (0-0; 3-3)




                                                 229
Geology
GEOL 109 Introduction to Physical
Geology (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to the materials and processes of
the physical earth: rocks and minerals, earth
structure and composition, plate tectonics,
volcanology, seismology, crustal deformation,
weathering and erosion, slope movement,
sedimentation, wind and water processes,
glaciation, and geologic time. Earth materials and
processes are studied in the laboratory and in the
field. This course is an environmental studies core
requirement.

Cross-listed: GENV 109.
Prerequisite(s): None. (3-3; 0-0)

GEOL 220 Geology of the Vancouver
Region (3 sem. hrs.)
An overview of the fundamental earth science
processes responsible for the creation,
transformation, and ongoing physical
development of western North America. These
processes are studied in the context of the
building of the North American continent
through tectonic forces and surface dynamics.
Topics include geologic time, tectonics,
volcanology, seismology, stratigraphy, glaciation,
erosion, paleontology, paleoclimatology, and
environmental issues. The objective of the course
is to familiarize students with the physical
environment around them so they may take a
more active role in the stewardship of the earth.
Field trips and field studies are included.

Cross-listed: GENV 220.
Prerequisite(s): None. (0-0; 3-0)

GEOL 320 Geomorphology (3 sem.
hrs.)
The scientific examination of the physical
processes which shape landform development,
structure, and dynamics. Topics include
weathering, slope systems, fluvial and coastal
environments, and glacial and periglacial systems.
Special emphasis is placed on deciphering past
events from current landscape structures. Field
trips and field studies are required.
NB: Offered every other year.
Cross-listed: GENV 320.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of geography and
environment including GENV 121, 131, 220, or
GEOL 109, 220, or instructor’s consent. (3-2 or 0-
0)

GEOL 321 Geography of Soils (3 sem.
hrs.)
A scientific investigation of the various aspects of
soil as a natural resource. Topics include physical,
chemical, and biological characteristics of soils
applied in the context of soil formation, soil
classification and land use, agriculture, and
environmental engineering. Soil mapping and
spatial distribution of soils is also considered.
Field trips and field studies are required.

Cross-listed: GENV 321.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of geography and
environment including one of GENV 121, 131,
220; or GEOL 109 or 220; or instructor’s consent.
(3-3; 0-0)



Gender Studies
GNDR 105 Introduction to Gender
Studies (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to Gender Studies, an
interdisciplinary field that asks critical questions
about the meanings of sex and gender in society.
Students will examine key issues, questions, and
debates in Gender Studies, both historical and
contemporary, and will analyze the multiple ways
that sex and gender have interacted with and
continue to intersect with race, class, nationality,
and other social identities, including religious
ones.

Cross-listed: SOCI 105.
Prerequisite(s): None.

GNDR 367 History of the Family after
1600 (3 sem. hrs.)
An examination of the historical development of
the family in the “modern” era. There is a central
focus on the formation of families and households
and the impact of religion on gender and family
roles. The course integrates contemporary gender


                                                 230
theory, but concentrates on the lives and ideas of
historical actors as they are revealed in the
historical record.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: HIST 367.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history or
instructor’s consent. For Gender Studies Minor
students: GNDR 105 and 3 s.h. of History. (3-0 or
3-0)

GNDR 403 Engendered History (3
sem. hrs.)
This seminar examines specific topics in the
history of gender throughout the period known
loosely as the modern world. The course is
designed to clarify the process through which
ideas of gender evolved and the ways in which
masculinity and femininity have been constructed
and experienced in a global context. The seminar
also examines group interactions across lines of
race, class, ethnicity, region, and religion and the
influence of groups striving to assert their own
identities on ideas of gender.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: HIST 403.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history, third or
fourth year standing, or instructor’s consent. For
Gender Studies Minor students: GNDR 105 and 3
sem. hrs. of HIST. (3-0 or 3-0)

GNDR 456 Seventeenth-Century
Women’s Writing (3 sem. hrs.)
The study of selected works written by women in
seventeenth century Britain and America, situated
in their cultural contexts.

Cross-listed: ENGL 456.
Prerequisite(s): For Gender Studies Minor
students: GNDR 105, and 6 sem. hrs. of ENGL,
or instructor's consent.



Greek
GREE 235 Elementary New
Testament Greek (3 sem. hrs.)
This course comprises an introduction to
Hellenistic (Koiné) Greek that is designed to
prepare the student for reading the Greek New
Testament with linguistic aptitude, as well as
developing a cultural intelligence pertaining to the
ancient people and history that gave rise to the
biblical text. Students will explore and investigate
linguistic theories and ideas related to the script,
grammar, syntax, and vocabulary of the Greek
New Testament, as well as evaluate and compare
differences and similarities that exist between the
Ancient Greco-Roman and Jewish cultures and
our own contemporary culture. This course will
not only encourage students to develop a
foundational proficiency that aids in their life-long
inquiry into the Greek New Testament and the
cultures from which it ensued; but will also enable
and encourage the creative application of fruit
born from such a study into the life of the student
in a manner that results in “skillful Christian
living”.

Cross-listed: RELS 235. (3-0; 3-0)
Prerequisite(s): None.

GREE 329 Elementary New
Testament Greek (3 sem. hrs.)
A continuing study of Koine Greek that is
designed to prepare the student for reading the
Greek New Testament.

Cross-listed: RELS 329.
Prerequisite(s): GREE/RELS 235. (3-0; 3-0)

GREE 331, 332 Readings in the Greek
New Testament (3, 3 sem. hrs.)
A reading of selected texts from the Greek New
Testament, including a study of syntax and an
introduction to exegetical methodology.

Cross-listed: RELS 331, 332.
Prerequisite(s): GREE/RELS 329. GREE 331 is
a prerequisite for 332. (3-0; 3-0)

GREE 532 Readings in the Greek New
Testament (3 sem. hrs.)




                                                  231
Hebrew
HEBR 245 Elementary Biblical
Hebrew (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to the grammar and vocabulary
of biblical Hebrew, designed to prepare the
student for serious study of the Hebrew Bible as
an item of both ancient and ongoing cultural,
historical, and theological significance.

Cross-listed: RELS 245. (3-0; 3-0)

HEBR 336 Elementary Biblical
Hebrew (3 sem. hrs.)
A continuing study of the grammar and
vocabulary of biblical Hebrew, designed to
prepare the student for serious reading and study
of the Hebrew Bible.

Cross-listed: RELS 336.
Prerequisite(s): RELS/HEBR 245. (3-0; 3-0)

HEBR 337, 338 Readings in the
Hebrew Bible (3, 3 sem. hrs.)
A reading of selected texts from the Hebrew
Bible, including a study of Hebrew syntax and an
introduction to exegetical methodology.

Cross-listed: RELS 337, 338.
Prerequisite(s): HEBR/RELS 336.
HEBR/RELS 337 is a prerequisite for 338. (3-0;
3-0)



History
HIST 107 World History to 1750:
Ancient to Early Modern (3 sem. hrs.)
This course involves a general examination of
primary themes in the history of the world's major
civilizations from antiquity to the eighteenth
century. Although European realities will be
examined, the focus of this course will be global in
nature with an emphasis on systems of cultural
and economic exchange and on the global nature
of historical development. As a part of this
process students are provided with the
opportunity to use the historical method,
including primary sources, to understand and
write accounts of the past.

Prerequisite(s): None. (2-1; 2-1)

HIST 108 World History from 1750 to
1945: Early Modern to Contemporary
(3 sem. hrs.)
This course involves a general examination of
primary themes in the history of the world's major
civilizations from 1750 to decolonization.
Although the continued growth of European
influence will be examined, the primary focus of
this course will be global in nature focusing on
systems of cultural and economic exchange, as
well as an investigation of non-European societies
on their own terms, including their responses to
the colonial experience and the factors which
influenced the nature of post-colonial
development. As a part of this process students
are provided with the opportunity to use the
historical method, including primary sources, to
understand and write accounts of the past.

Prerequisite(s): None. (2-1; 2-1)

HIST 109 World History Since 1945 (3
sem. hrs.)
An overview of the world’s major civilizations
since the last year of World War II, a period of
profound global transformation marked by the
Cold War, the escalation of intra-state conflicts in
the wake of the Cold War, and evolving ideas of
human security.

Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0; 3-0)

HIST 111 History of Western
Civilization (3 sem. hrs.)
An exploration of the main events, individuals,
and ideas in the history of Western society, from
its beginnings in the ancient Near East to the birth
of the modern era in the Renaissance and
Reformation. Key themes that will be investigated
include: the emergence of the first civilizations;
the development of citizenship and philosophy;
the growth and transformation of Christianity; the
emergence of Islam; changes in gender roles and
the family. As part of this exploration, students
will use historical methods, with a focus on



                                                 232
reading primary sources, to understand and
describe the past.

Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0; 3-0)

HIST 112 History of Western
Civilization (3 sem. hrs.)
An exploration of the main events, individuals,
and ideas in the history of Western society, from
the mid-seventeenth century to the mid-twentieth
century. Key topics investigated include: the rise
of absolutism; the Scientific Revolution and
Enlightenment; the Industrial and French
Revolutions; the development of new political
ideologies, including liberalism, nationalism and
socialism; changes in gender roles and the family;
colonialism and imperialism; the origins and
consequences of both World Wars, fascism,
communism, and the Cold War. As part of this
exploration, students will use historical methods,
with a focus on reading primary sources, to
understand and describe the past.

Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0; or 3-0)

HIST 135 Globalization, Co-Existence,
and Identity (3 sem. hrs.)
Examines the construction of past events that
make up the body of knowledge known as Pre-
Confederation Canada; explores alternative forms
of understanding Canada’s past and the possibility
of a history of relation; dialogues with indigenous
and newcomer ways of knowing; reimagines
Canada’s past in the formation of identity and
nationalism, colony and empire, and co-existence
and partnership in local, national, and global
contexts. Considers how representations of
Canada’s past continue to shape relations between
indigenous nations and settler society, Quebec and
Canada, and Canada and the globe.

Prerequisite(s): None. (2-1; 2-1)

HIST 136 All My Relations: Canada
and the World after 1867 (3 sem. hrs.)
Examines the construction of past events that
make up the body of knowledge known as Post-
Confederation Canada; explores alternative
narratives from those of progressive nationalism
and identity politics as informed by race, class,
gender, ethnicity, and environmentalism and
encourages a history of relation; dialogues with
Indigenous and newcomer ways of knowing.
Considers how Canada’s past shaped (and
continues to inform) relations between indigenous
nations and settler society, Quebec and Canada,
charter members and minorities, patriarchy and
women, society and the environment, and Canada
and the globe.

Prerequisite(s): None.

HIST 230 History of Nursing (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course examines the development of
Canadian nursing over the past four centuries,
with an emphasis on the twentieth century. Based
on an understanding of nursing as rooted in a
Christian ethos of caring for strangers, this course
critically explores the ways in which religion,
politics, gender, race, economics, technology,
culture, war, and epidemics have influenced the
development of nursing both nationally and
globally.

Cross-listed: NURS 230.
Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0; 3-0)

HIST 237 Genocide, Reconciliation
and Co-existence: Indigenous
Nationhood and Canada (3 sem. hrs.)
The history of First Nations, Métis Nations and
Inuit Nations in Canada from time immemorial
through to the present from various perspectives
gained from interactions with Indigenous authors
and guest speakers and cultural experiences such
as immersion trips to Indigenous territories.
Engage broad economic, social, and political
themes associated with Canada's settler society
and gain cultural intelligence by analyzing from an
Indigenous perspective how standard narratives of
progress shaped early encounters, the fur trade
economy, governmental policy, Christianity and
culture, residential schools, land reserves and self-
government. Considers the ways in which
Indigenous nations utilized and reshaped Canada’s
historical narrative to resist assimilation,
paternalism, “civilization”, marginalization, and
integration. Examines arguments for partnership,
cooperation, negotiation, and reconciliation in a
movement towards peaceful co-existence.



                                                 233
Cross-listed: POLS 237.
Prerequisite(s): None.

HIST 251, 252 History of the United
States of America (3, 3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to the social, cultural, political,
and economic development of the United States
from the colonial period to the present day. HIST
251 examines that history until the Civil War;
HIST 252 traces developments since the Civil
War.

Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0; 3-0)

HIST 302 Greece and Rome:
Leadership in the Ancient World RP (3
sem. hrs.)
A study of the most influential leadership in
ancient Greece and Rome. Plutarch’s biographical
studies are the main focus. Various accounts of
Herodotus, Thucydides, Aristotle, Xenophon,
Livy, Sallust, Tacitus, and Suetonius are used as
supplementary material.

NB: Course taught at Catholic Pacific College, an
approved TWU learning centre.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of History including
HIST 107 or HIST 111, or instructor’s consent.
(3-0 or 3-0)

HIST 304 Late Medieval Europe (3
sem. hrs.)
An inquiry into a period of Europe’s past in which
beliefs, attitudes, and institutions, moulded in the
previous centuries, were consolidated into shapes
that mark modern European (and North
American) culture. The outlines of the modern
state and of the modern family. An examination of
late medieval civilization for indications of decline
and rebirth. Signs of struggle between forces of
tradition and of innovation, idealism and material
or corporeal realities, and gender relations.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history including
HIST 107 or HIST 111, or instructor’s consent.
(3-0 or 3-0)

HIST 306 History of Economic
Thought (3 sem. hrs.)
An investigation of the overlap of economic
history and economic thought all the way from
ancient Greeks philosophers, through medieval
scholastics, to mercantilist businessmen, to Adam
Smith and the classical economists of the
Industrial Revolution, to macroeconomists
emerging from the Great Depression, and into the
twenty-first century. Students examine the main
economic questions and themes of these various
periods including: What is the good life? Is
business moral? How do selfish individuals
promote societal good through markets? What is
the proper role and scope of government? As an
inquiry-based course, students will have
considerable latitude to examine topics of
particular interest to them in more detail.

NB: May not be offered every year.
Cross-listed: ECON 306.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history including
HIST 111 or 112. (3-0 or 3-0)

HIST 307 Renaissance Europe (3 sem.
hrs.)
An examination of the social, intellectual, artistic,
political, and economic transformations that gave
rise to, and followed in, the wake of the “rebirth”
of ancient Greek and Roman culture that began in
Italy in the mid-fourteenth century and spread to
the rest of Europe for the next 200 years.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history including
HIST 107 or 111, or instructor’s consent. (3-0 or
3-0)

HIST 308 Reformation Europe (3 sem.
hrs.)
An examination of the social, intellectual, artistic,
and political history of Western Europe from the
fourteenth to the seventeenth century, with a
special emphasis on changes in theology and
devotional practices, and the ensuing wars of
religion, as the Protestant and Catholic
Reformations spread throughout Europe.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: RELS 368.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sm. hrs. of history including
one of HIST 107, 111, 112, or instructor’s consent
(3-0)


                                                  234
HIST 309 The Age of Enlightenment
(3 sem. hrs.)
An examination of the main events, individuals,
and ideas in European history from 1600 to 1789.
Key topics include: the growth of absolutism, the
Scientific Revolution, and the Enlightenment; the
development of new political and economic
theories; artistic and cultural movements; the rise
of the public sphere; religious revivals; and
changes in marriage, the family, and gender roles.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history including
one of HIST 107, 111, or 112, or instructor’s
consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

HIST 310 History in Practice (3 sem.
hrs.)
An exploration of the various manifestations of
the practice of history in the public sphere.
Students will be exposed to the ways in which
communities, regions, nations, and other polities
collect, manage, create, present and understand
their histories, pasts, and stories. Analyze how
forms of historical consciousness show
themselves in archives and museums, films and
theatrical productions, monuments and
memorials, anniversaries and celebrations,
government policies and sporting achievements,
genealogy and national origin stories, etc. Practical
application of historical skills and tools through
communication with public historians, visits to
local historic sites, completing relevant
assignments and engaging experiential learning.
Students will gain valuable experiences and
knowledge related to a variety of areas where
public history is practiced and will be exposed to
career opportunities in history. This course is a
prerequisite for other History Practicum
opportunities.

NB: This course is the prerequisite for any history
practicum (HIST 315). Not offered every year. See
department chair.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history. (3-0 or 3-
0)

HIST 312 Science and Technology in
Global Perspective (3 sem. hrs.)
This course provides a survey of the history of
science and technology from the ancient world to
the present with particular emphasis on the early-
modern and modern eras. While much of the
focus is on developments in the Western world,
this course also examines select issues and events
in a comparative world perspective.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: GENV 314.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history or third
year standing in the natural and applied sciences.
(3-0 or 3-0)

HIST 315, 316 History Practicum (3
sem. hrs.)
A supervised field experience designed to give
students an opportunity to apply the skills and
methodology of the discipline of history in a
variety of settings so as to expose them to the
broad range of contemporary applications for
their formal education. Placements may take place
in a variety of public settings including but not
limited to areas such as businesses and industry,
government and public service, non-governmental
organizations and international agencies,
information management and preservation,
resource management and land use, and education
and training.

NB: Not offered every year. See department
chair. Pass/fail course.
Prerequisite(s): Completion of HIST 310 with a
minimum grade of a C+. Students may include a
maximum of 6 sem. hrs. in their history major, a
maximum of 3 sem. hrs. of practicum in their
concentration or minor, and a maximum of 9 sem.
hrs. in their degree. (3-0 or 3-0)

HIST 321 Tudor-Stuart England (3
sem. hrs.)
An exploration of the history of England from the
coming of the Tudors in the fifteenth century to
the so-called Glorious Revolution at the end of
the seventeenth century. This was an eventful age,
featuring the reigns of Henry VIII and Elizabeth
I, the defeat of the Spanish Armada, the creativity
of William Shakespeare, a bitterly fought civil war,
and the development of a limited monarchy.
Particular attention is paid to two developments
that transformed English life: the religious
reformations of the sixteenth century, and the civil




                                                235
war and political revolutions of the seventeenth
century.

Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history, including
one of HIST 107, 111, 112 or permission of
instructor. (3-0; 3-0)

HIST 324 Nineteenth Century Europe
(3 sem. hrs.)
This course examines the long nineteenth century
from the French Revolution to the onset of the
Great War. Explores key movements and themes
in political, intellectual, and socio-economic
history through lectures, discussion groups, and
close readings of primary and secondary sources.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history including
HIST 108 or 112, or instructor’s consent. (3-0 or
3-0)

HIST 325 Twentieth Century Europe
(3 sem. hrs.)
This course involves an investigation of significant
themes in the historical development of European
society since 1914. Primary focus is on the issue of
changing European perceptions of the nature of
social organizations and of Europe’s broader role
in the international system. Topics include: the
origin, nature, and effects of world war; the
Russian Revolution and the rise of the Soviet
state; the rise of Fascism and the emergence of
“totalitarian” style movements; the construction
of the Soviet empire in Eastern Europe and the
emergence and ultimate resolution of the cold
war; decolonization; and the rise of the welfare
state and emergence of European federalism.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history including
HIST 108 or 112, or instructor’s consent. (3-0 or
3-0)

HIST 332 Issues in the History of
British Columbia (3 sem. hrs.)
The history of British Columbia from its earliest
beginnings to the late 1980s. The province’s move
from regionalism, to provincialism, to
internationalism by examining many of the social,
cultural, political, and economic forces of change
which shaped the “West Beyond the West” in
Canada. Specific aspects of BC’s history that
particularly enlighten us about the character of the
region, its unique place in Canadian history, and
how these events have shaped the province today.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: POLS 332.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history including
HIST 135 or 136, or instructor’s consent. (3-0 or
3-0)

HIST 334 Issues in Canadian
Government and Politics (3 sem. hrs.)
Provides the student with a detailed examination
of the political issues that divide and unite
Canadians. Topics include: discussion of
alternative theoretical approaches to Canadian
politics; regionalism, citizenship, and political
participation; the French- English Cleavage;
provincialism versus federalism; aboriginal
politics; gender and class issues; the uneasy
relationship between the United States and
Canada; multiculturalism and bilingualism as key
indicators of Canadian political culture; the
Executive in Parliament dispute; legislative politics
and judicial interpretation; law and constitution.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: POLS 334.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history including
HIST 135 or 136, or instructor’s consent. (3-0 or
3-0)

HIST 335 Development of the
Canadian Constitution (3 sem. hrs.)
A survey of the historical development of the
Canadian Constitution from 1867 to the present.
The search for an amending formula and the
patriation of the Constitution. The evolving nature
of the federation; the Meech Lake Accord; the
Charlottetown Accord; the October 26
Referendum; Western demands for major changes
to the Senate and other national institutions of the
federation, and the unfinished constitutional
agenda. The profound effect on law and public
policy development resulting from the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: POLS 335.




                                                 236
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history including
HIST 135 or 136, or instructor’s consent. (3-0 or
3-0)

HIST 339 Wilderness, Water and
Global Warming: Canadian
Environmental History (3 sem. hrs.)
A thematic case study approach to Canadian
Environmental History that highlights the nation’s
unique reciprocal relationships with nature as
illustrated through ideas (Wilderness), material
resources (Water) and social/ethical issues (Global
Warming). Investigates how “natural” elements
like climate, topography, plants, animals and
diseases have influenced our choices about nature,
and how “cultural” content, like “clean/green”
energy initiatives, pipeline projects, save the whale
campaigns, and fear of climate change, have
shaped our perceptions of the places we inhabit.
Critically engages the ethical decisions we make
about the environment that may determine the
future we wish to construct as Canadian and
global citizens.

NB: Offered every other year.
Cross-listed: GENV 312.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history, or
instructor’s consent. (0-0; 3-0)

HIST 340 Issues in First Nations-
Canadian Relations (3 sem. hrs.)
Explores specific events that have shaped the
relationship between First Nations, Inuit and
Metis and the Canadian state and have informed
the interaction between indigenous peoples and
settler society. Weekly seminars will cover topics
such as the Indian Act, reserves, treaties, violence
against indigenous women, residential schools, the
Sixties Scoop, economic development and
sustainability, crime and punishment, art and
cultural representation, and activism and
resurgence. The thematic approach will explore
different visions for how indigenous communities
and Canadian society can ‘live together in a good
way.”

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: POLS 340.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history including
HIST 135 or 136, POLS 234 or HIST/POLS 237,
or instructor’s consent. (3-0 or 3-0)
HIST 348 Religion in Canada (3 sem.
hrs.)
Religious developments in Canada from the
beginning of European settlement to today. The
relationship between such developments and the
political, economic, and social life of the country.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: RELS 378.
Prerequisite(s): Any two of HIST 135, 136, 264,
347, 362. (3-0 or 3-0)

HIST 352 Government and Politics of
the United States (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to American politics, including
the major branches of government: the
presidency, the Congress, and the Supreme Court.
The dynamics of American political institutions
and their interaction. The prime emphasis is on
national politics, especially the interaction of the
executive and legislative, including presidential
decision-making.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: POLS 352.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history including
HIST 135, 136, 251, 252, 347; or instructor’s
consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

HIST 355 American Foreign Policy (3
sem. hrs.)
A study of principle themes in United States
foreign policy with in-depth review of post-
Second World War presidential periods. Students
analyze the causes and results of American policy
choices in the context of evolving world order.
The course explores philosophy and leadership
styles.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: POLS 355.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history including
one of HIST 136, 251, 252, 347; or instructor’s
consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

HIST 361 History of Christianity I (3
sem. hrs.)
A study of the history of the Christian church
from the turn of the first century to the eve of the
sixteenth century Reformation, with attention to



                                                 237
the persons, events, and issues involved in the
major developments of Christianity.

Cross-listed: RELS 361, HIST 561.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history including
HIST 111 or 112. (3-0; 0-0)

HIST 362 History of Christianity II (3
sem. hrs.)
An examination of the development of the
Christian church from the late medieval period
through the early twenty-first century. Key topics
include: the Protestant and Catholic reformations;
the Great Awakenings and the rise of modern
evangelism, fundamentalism, and the growth of
modern missionary movements, along with a
consideration of significant individuals, changes in
theology, institutions, devotional practices, gender
roles, and attempts to engage and shape culture.

Cross-listed: RELS 362, HIST 562.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history including
HIST 111 or 112. (3-0 or 3-0)

HIST 366 History of the Family to 1600
(3 sem. hrs.)
This course examines the historical development
of the family beginning with the ancient world up
to 1600. A central inquiry is the formation of
families and households, as well as the impact of
religion on gender and family roles. The course
also explores the use of power and coercion in the
organization of family. It includes an inquiry into
contemporary gender theory but concentrates on
the lives and ideas of actual persons insofar as the
historical record reveals them.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history including
HIST 107 or 111, or instructor’s consent. (3-0 or
3-0)

HIST 367 History of the Family after
1600 (3 sem. hrs.)
An examination of the historical development of
the family in the “modern” era. There is a central
focus on the formation of families and households
and the impact of religion on gender and family
roles. The course integrates contemporary gender
theory, but concentrates on the lives and ideas of
historical actors as they are revealed in the
historical record.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: GNDR 367.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history or
instructor’s consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

HIST 371 Africa Since 1500: From Pre-
colonial to Colonial (3 sem. hrs.)
This course will involve an examination of the
major themes of sub-Saharan African history from
1500 to the partition of Africa following the Berlin
Conference of 1884. Primary emphasis will be on
the nature of African societies and the political,
social, and economic consequences of their
interaction with Europe. Special attention will be
given to issues such as the origins and nature of
African societies; the rise and impact of the slave
trade; the growth of the European presence and
the nature of European imperialism; and the onset
of direct European colonial rule and the African
response to it.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history including
HIST 107, 108, or 109. (3-0 or 3-0)

HIST 372 Africa Since 1500: From
Colonial to National (3 sem. hrs.)
This course will involve a survey of Sub-Saharan
African history since the Berlin Conference of
1884-1885. Primary emphasis will be on a variety
of regions at various stages of their development,
while exploring the roles of colonial power,
emerging nationalisms, and the politics of
underdevelopment.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history including
HIST 107, 108, or 109. (3-0 or 3-0)

HIST 377 Twentieth Century China
and East Asia (3 sem. hrs.)
A cultural and political history of China and Japan
since 1900 with an emphasis on late twentieth
century issues. Course includes discussion of
Hong Kong and Taiwan as Chinese territories,
and Korea as a primary neighbour of China and
Japan. Of special interest are the relations of Japan
and China with the United States.


                                                 238
NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: POLS 377.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history including
HIST 107 or 108. (3-0 or 3-0)

HIST 381 The Arab Middle East in the
Twentieth Century: The Politics of
Identity (3 sem. hrs.)
An examination of some major theses in the
history of the Arab Middle East since the breakup
of the Ottoman Empire following World War I.
The course examines the role played by issues of
identity in the development of national structures
in the Arab East (Egypt, Syria, Lebanon, Iraq,
Saudi Arabia, and the Gulf States). Themes
include: the nature of the Islamic community, the
structure and legacy of the Ottoman rule, post-
Ottoman settlement and the impact of colonial
rule, the emergence of nationalist politics and the
growth of contemporary Arab state system, oil
and the politics of family rule in the Gulf States,
and the relationship between religion and politics.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history including
HIST 107, 108, or 109. (3-0; 3-0)

HIST 382 Palestine and the History of
the Arab - Israeli Conflict (3 sem. hrs.)
A survey of the history of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. The historical roots of the conflict, issues
of land ownership and immigration, the
development of national consciousness, and the
process of state formation within both
communities, impacts on the larger international
community, and problems of peacemaking.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history including
HIST 107, 108, or 109. (3-0; 3-0)

HIST 390 Special Topics in History (3
sem. hrs.)
An examination of special topics or issues in
history that are not considered in depth in other
courses.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history, third or
fourth year standing, or instructor’s consent. (3-0
or 3-0)
HIST 391 Canadian Governmental
Leadership (3 sem. hrs.)
In the setting of the historical Booth Mansion in
Ottawa, students are invited to explore the history
of Canadian political leadership. Using the
historical method, including research in primary
sources, they will evaluate the leadership of
Canadian Prime Ministers and examine how they
addressed the needs and crises of the nation. By
means of their enquiries into Canada’s political
leadership, students will develop their own
theories of effective leadership.

Cross-listed: POLS 391; SOCI 391.
Prerequisite(s): Admission to Laurentian
Leadership Centre. (3-0; 3-0)

HIST 392 Sugar, Slaves, Silver: The
Atlantic World, 1500–1850 (3 sem. hrs.)
This course examines the Atlantic world during an
era of immense global change. Since the
navigations of the fifteenth century, the Atlantic
has been a corridor for fundamental exchanges of
peoples, crops, technology, and ideas. Topics
include: early maritime explorations, the
destruction and reconfiguration of indigenous
societies, the labour migrations of Europeans,
Native Americans, and Africans, slavery and the
trans-Atlantic slave trade, the establishment of an
Atlantic economy, the maturation of Euro-
American colonial societies and their struggles for
autonomy and national independence.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history, third or
fourth year standing, or instructor’s consent. (3-0;
3-0)
HIST 400 Directed Studies in History
(3 sem. hrs.)
Independent but guided reading and research in a
specialized area of history of interest to students.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history and
instructor’s consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

HIST 403 Engendered History (3 sem.
hrs.)
This seminar examines specific topics in the
history of gender throughout the period known
loosely as the modern world. The course is
designed to clarify the process through which



                                                 239
ideas of gender evolved and the ways in which
masculinity and femininity have been constructed
and experienced in a global context. The seminar
also examines group interactions across lines of
race, class, ethnicity, region, and religion and the
influence of groups striving to assert their own
identities on ideas of gender.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: GNDR 403.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history, third or
fourth year standing, or instructor’s consent. (3-0
or 3-0)

HIST 406 War, Peace, and Society (3
sem. hrs.)
Examines the changing nature of, and approaches
to, war and its effect on society from the ancient
world to the present, including an assessment of
various visions and proposals for peace. The
course includes an assessment of historic and
relatively recent armed conflicts, exploring the
causes of contemporary conflict and some of its
distinctive characteristics. It also evaluates the
effectiveness of various strategies for preventing,
abating, and terminating current forms of conflict.
Questions discussed include: Why do states go to
war? How do they create a lasting peace? What
role does morality play in foreign policy? What is
our obligation to just peace or just war?

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: POLS 406.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history, third or
fourth year standing, or instructor’s consent. (3-0
or 3-0)

HIST 409 Nature, Society, and History
in Global Perspective (3 sem. hrs.)
Human interaction with the environment is the
most fundamental of all relationships. This course
examines the different ways in which societies
have defined, understood, and used their non-
human surroundings and the processes through
which the environment influences culture and
adapts to human communities. Students explore
the historical context of the human-nature
interaction in global perspective and compare the
ways in which the concepts of politics,
nationalism, race, ethnicity, gender, religion, etc.
inform and guide the relationship.
NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: GENV 414.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history, third or
fourth year standing, or instructor’s consent. (3-0;
0-0)

HIST 411 History, Culture, and
Interpreting the Past (3 sem. hrs.)
The study of history relies on the written and oral
record of human experience. The use to which
words have been put has varied over time ranging
from the ancient world’s innocent acceptance of
recorded inventories and boastful heroic
conquests, to the postmodern era where the text is
not a bearer of truth but an instrument of power.
This course traces the place of the text in the
human effort to know and remember the past.
Although the written text has been foundational
for the study of the past, people have left other
signs of their presence and we interact with other
realities than the text. This course brings in
additional disciplines including philosophy, literary
criticism, biology, psychology, physics, and biblical
studies.

NB: Approved alternative to IDIS 400.
Prerequisite(s): Enrolment priority given to
fourth year history majors, concentrations, and
minors; third- and fourth-year students with
minimum of 6 sem. hrs. of history are considered.
(3-0; 0-0)

HIST 412 Senior Thesis (3 sem. hrs.)
A program of independent readings and research
on a specific topic leading to a written paper for
students choosing the European area. A research
project involving the use of primary sources,
archives, etc., for those choosing the North
American area.

NB: For history majors only. See department
chair.
Prerequisite(s): 15 sem. hrs. of history including
HIST 411.

HIST 423 History of the First World
War (3 sem. hrs.)
A seminar course involving an examination of the
origins and course of the First World War.
Primary focus on various campaigns and fronts of
the war, and on specific issues such as the nature


                                                 240
and impact of trench warfare, the domestic
policies of the belligerent powers, and the social,
economic, and political impact of the conflict.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history including
one of HIST 108, 112, 136, or 252; or instructor’s
consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

HIST 424 The History of the Second
World War (3 sem. hrs.)
A seminar course involving an examination of the
origins and course of the Second World War.
Primary focus on main campaigns of the war in
Europe and Asia, the domestic policies of the
belligerent powers, and the social, economic, and
political impact of the conflict.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history including
one of HIST 108, 112, 136, or 252. (3-0 or 3-0)

HIST 435 Social History of Canada (3
sem. hrs.)
An examination of major developments in the
society and culture of Canada with a particular
spotlight on the diverse experience of the people
who made Canada. The course highlights aspects
of Canadian identity as seen through the lenses of
gender, race, class, ethnicity, religion, and region.
The focus is on the interaction between migrant
groups and the host society, rural and urban
societies, education and social reforms, labour and
capital, and changing gender roles.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history including
one of HIST 135 or 136. (3-0 or 0-0)

HIST 436 Canadian and U.S.A.
Relations (3 sem. hrs.)
A survey of relations between the two countries
from their origins, ranging from military and
diplomatic contacts to intellectual and cultural.
Comparative developments in the two nations.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: POLS 436.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history including
one of HIST 135, 136, 251, or 252. (3-0 or 3-0)
HIST 440 The Evolution of Canadian
Foreign Policy (3 sem. hrs.)
An overview of the formulation and trends of
Canadian foreign policy in the period since
Confederation. The domestic and external
determinants of Canadian foreign policy, the
nature of the foreign policy-making process, and
the evolution of key themes in Canadian foreign
policy.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: POLS 440.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history including
one of HIST 109, 135, or 136. (0-0; 3-0)

HIST 471 Missions and Imperialism in
the Global Context (3 sem. hrs.)
This seminar-based course examines some of the
major themes in the history of the West’s colonial
encounter with non-Western communities and the
role played by Christian missions and missionaries
in that process. Primary attention is given not only
to the origins of, and complex inter-relationship
between, the colonial encounter and the
evangelical enterprise, but to the redefinition and
reconstruction of Western and non-Western
identities which emerged as a result of such
interactions.

Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history including
HIST 108. (3-0; 3-0)

HIST 490 Special Topics in History (3
sem. hrs.)
An examination of special topics or issues in
history that are not considered in depth in other
courses.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history, third or
fourth year standing, or instructor’s consent. (3-0
or 3-0)

HIST 497, 498 Honours Thesis (3, 3
sem. hrs.)
A 12,000-15,000-word thesis based on a review of
the secondary literature and research in primary
sources in archival, published, microform,
microfiche, or electronic form, on an approved
topic. An oral defence and a library-acceptable



                                                241
copy are required. Taken in fourth year by all
honours students in history.

Prerequisite(s): Application and acceptance into
honours program in history. See department chair.
(3-0; 3-0)



History, Graduate
Courses
HIST 503 Engendered History (3 sem.
hrs.)
Examines specific topics in the history of gender
throughout the period known loosely as the
modern world, and is designed to clarify the
process through which ideas of gender evolved
and the ways in which masculinity and femininity
have been constructed and experienced in a global
context. Also examines group interactions across
lines of race, class, ethnicity, region, and religion,
and the influence of groups striving to assert their
own identities on ideas of gender.

HIST 504 Late Medieval Europe (3
sem. hrs.)
An inquiry into a period of Europe’s past in which
beliefs, attitudes and institutions, moulded in the
previous centuries, were consolidated into shapes
that mark modern European (and North
American) culture. The outlines of the modern
state and of the modern family are examined. It is
also an examination of late medieval civilization
for indications of decline and rebirth. The course
looks for signs of struggle between forces of
tradition and of innovation, and between idealism
and material or corporeal realities.

HIST 506 War, Peace, and Society (3
sem. hrs.)
Surveys the changing nature of and approaches to
war and its effect on society from the Middle Ages
to the present including an examination of various
visions and proposals for peace. Includes an
assessment of relatively recent armed conflict in
Africa, Central Europe, and the Middle East,
exploring the causes of contemporary conflict and
some of its distinctive characteristics. Also
evaluates the effectiveness of various strategies for
preventing, abating, and terminating current forms
of conflict. Some of the questions discussed are:
Why do states go to war? How do they create a
lasting peace? What role does morality play in
foreign policy? What is our obligation to just
peace or just war?

HIST 507 Renaissance Europe (3 sem.
hrs.)
A graduate-level course designed to survey a
historical period in greater depth while
introducing students to related primary and
secondary sources. Students will be familiarized
with major themes, events, and issues of
interpretation in the history of European history
from approximately the mid-fourteenth through
to the sixteenth century. Particular attention will
be paid to the “rebirth” of ancient Greek and
Roman culture that began in the Italian
commercial and educational centres of Milan,
Florence, Venice and Rome. This course will
examine the social, intellectual, artistic, political,
and economic history of the Renaissance as it
developed in Italy and spread to the rest of
Europe. These and other topics will be explored
through close readings of primary sources.
Students will also consider various methodological
and theoretical approaches that have influenced
the way that modern historians have analyzed and
explained this period in European history.

HIST 508 Reformation Europe (3 sem.
hrs.)
Examines the nature of religious reform in the
sixteenth century. Religious ideas are the starting
point for an examination of economic conditions,
the existing social structure, the family, and the
state. Examines how ideas were communicated to
and received by the common people. It also
examines displays of intolerance and tolerance,
coercion and power, and relations between
government and society, and between women and
men.

HIST 509 Early Modern Europe: 1600-
1789 (3 sem. hrs.)
An examination of developments and events from
1600 to 1800 including religious wars, the witch
craze, growth of absolutism and political rights,
enlightened despots, movements within the


                                                  242
church and the culture of the enlightenment. In
addition, wealth and poverty, social hierarchies,
popular customs and culture, marriage, the family,
and gender are examined.

HIST 510 History in Practice (3 sem.
hrs.)
An analysis of the practice of history in the public
sphere including the ways in which communities,
regions, nations, and other entities collect,
manage, create, present, and understand their
histories and stories. How forms of historical
consciousness show themselves in archives,
museums, films, monuments, anniversaries,
government policies, genealogy, etc. Practical
application of historical skills and tools through
communication with public historians, visits to
local historic sites, and relevant assignments and
experiential learning. Students gain valuable
experiences and knowledge related to a variety of
areas where public history is practiced and are
exposed to career opportunities in history.

HIST 515 History of Science and
Religion from Copernicus to Creation
Science (3 sem. hrs.)
Examines the engagement of science and religion
in western culture over the past five centuries. In
1896, Andrew Dickson White published his
famous History of the Warfare of Science with
Theology in Christendom, a work that helped
establish the belief that science and religion were
irreconcilable domains. This course examines the
validity of that claim from the Copernican
revolution in the sixteenth century to the rise of
the modern Creation Science movement, and aims
to place the relationship between science and faith
in a mature historical, scientific, and theological
context.

HIST 521 Family, Gender, and Power
(3 sem. hrs.)
Examines the historical development of the family
beginning with the ancient world up to 1600. A
central inquiry is the formation of families and
households, as well as the impact of religion on
gender and family roles. The course also explores
the use of power and coercion in the organization
of family and includes an inquiry into
contemporary gender theory but concentrates on
the lives and ideas of actual persons insofar as the
historical record reveals them.

HIST 522 History of the Family after
1600 (3 sem. hrs.)
Examines the historical development of the family
from 1600 to the present day. A central inquiry is
the formation of families and households, as well
the impact of religion on gender and family roles.
The course also explores the use of power and
coercion in the organization of family and
includes an inquiry into contemporary gender
theory but concentrates on the lives and ideas of
actual persons insofar as the historical record
reveals them.

HIST 523 Tudor-Stuart England
This course is designed to survey a historical
period in greater depth while introducing students
to related primary and secondary sources.
Students are familiarized with major themes,
events, and issues of interpretation in the history
of early modern England. Particular attention is
paid to two developments that transformed
English life: the religious reformations of the
sixteenth century, and the civil war and political
revolutions of the seventeenth century. These and
other topics are explored through close readings
of primary sources. Students also consider various
methodological and theoretical approaches that
have influenced the way that modern historians
have analyzed and explained this period in English
history.

HIST 524 Nineteenth Century Europe
(3 sem. hrs.)
This course is designed to survey a historical
period in greater depth while introducing students
to related primary and secondary sources.
Students will become familiar with major themes,
events, and issues of interpretation in the history
of European history during the “long” nineteenth
century from the French Revolution to the onset
of the Great War. It explores key movements and
themes in political, intellectual, gender, and socio-
economic history through lectures, discussion
groups, and the close readings of primary and
secondary sources. Students will also consider
various methodological and theoretical approaches
that have influenced the way that modern



                                                 243
historians have analyzed and explained this period
in European history.

HIST 532 Issues in B.C. History (3
sem. hrs.)
Explores issues in the history of British Columbia
from its earliest beginnings to the early 2000s. In
particular, the province’s move from regionalism,
to provincialism, to internationalism is explored
by examining many of the social, cultural, political,
and economic forces of change that shape the
“West Beyond the West” in Canada. The lectures,
readings, and discussions focus on specific aspects
of BC’s history that particularly enlighten us about
the character of the region, its unique place in
Canadian history, and how these events have
shaped the province today.

HIST 533 Development of the
Canadian Constitution
A historical and political analysis of the major
steps leading to the present constitution, including
landmark court cases, attempted and successful
amendments (Constitution Act 1981, the Meech
Lake Accord, the Charlottetown Accord, etc.) and
various historical acts both prior to and post-
Confederation.

HIST 534 Canadian Political Thought:
An Intellectual History
This course examines selected Canadian authors
(George Grant, Will Kymlicka, and Charles Taylor
most prominently) who have contributed
significantly to the development of Canadian
political discourse. Topics include federalism,
multiculturalism, and national identity. The
systematic study of these particular authors aids in
understanding the development of Canadian
political thought. The first part of the course
provides the intellectual history to enable an
effective study of George P. Grant, Will Kymlicka,
and Charles Taylor through a careful reading of
Fierlbeck, Political Thought in Canada: An
Intellectual History.

HIST 535 Social History of Canada
This seminar course examines major
developments in the society and culture of Canada
with a particular spotlight on the diverse
experience of the people who made Canada. The
course highlights aspects of the evolution of
Canadian identity as seen through the various
lenses of gender, race, class, ethnicity, religion, and
region. The focus is on the interaction between
migrant groups and the host society (and the shift
from an indigenous to Euro-Canadian to
multicultural host society), rural and urban
societies, education and social reforms, labour and
capital in the industrialization of Canada, and
changing gender roles (of women and men) in
Canadian society.

HIST 537 Canada and War in the
Twentieth Century (3 sem. hrs.)
Surveys the changing social, political, and cultural
impact of war on Canada in the twentieth century.
The course is divided into four sections—World
War I, World War II, the Cold War, and Post-
Cold War. In each section students examine
Canadian responses to war and warfare and the
impact of those responses in shaping Canadian
politics (both domestic and foreign policy),
society, and culture. Topics include defence,
security, and Canadian nationalism; the role of
imperialism and continentalism in influencing
Canadian identity and Canadian foreign policy;
Canada as a middle power and the shift to Canada
as a no power; war and the changing role of
women in Canadian society; and the creation of
Canadian military myths.

HIST 540 Issues in First Nations –
Canadian Relations (3 sem. hrs.)
Examines the history of First Nations in Canada
from pre-contact with newcomers through to the
present time. Broad economic, social, and political
themes that intersect with the history of its
original peoples is covered including early
encounters, fur trade economy, governmental
policy, Christianity and culture, education,
reservations and land claims. It surveys the major
eras—assimilation, protection, civilization,
marginalization, and integration—by specifically
highlighting the observations and experiences of
First Nations.

HIST 542 Evolution of Canadian
Foreign Policy (3 sem. hrs.)
This course provides an overview of the
formulation and trends of Canadian foreign policy
from confederation to the present. The domestic
and external determinants of Canadian foreign


                                                   244
policy, the nature of the foreign policy-making
process, and the evolution of key themes in
Canadian foreign policy are its major themes.

HIST 543 Medieval Europe 500-1250 (3
sem. hrs.)
An inquiry into the origins of European
civilization. It examines what features from the
ancient world survived the fall of Roman culture
and the nature of the native Germanic and Slavic
traditions. It looks at the way Christianity was
received and altered. It looks at political, social,
gender, and economic relationships and at the
struggle between spiritual ideals on the one hand
and traditional attitudes and material realities on
the other.

HIST 547 History of Religion in the
U.S.A. (3 sem. hrs.)
Writing in the 1830s, Alex de Tocqueville noted
the profound influence religion had upon the
American populace, arguing that “there are some
who profess Christian dogmas because they
believe them and others who do so because they
are afraid to look as though they did not believe in
them. So Christianity reigns without obstacles, by
universal consent.” At times, his comments
continue to ring true, particularly with regard to
the centrality of religious faith to the American
experience. While not intended to be exhaustive,
this course examines representative episodes in
the history of religion in the United States, albeit
largely in its Christian (and Protestant) form.

HIST 548 History of Religion in
Canada (3 sem. hrs.)
Canada is sometimes regarded as a more secular
version of its American neighbour. Henry Alline,
the late eighteenth century Nova Scotian revivalist,
would not have agreed, for he believed that while
Old and New England were engaged in a “most
inhuman war,” a great redeemer nation was
emerging in his corner of British North America.
This course examines Canada’s rich Christian
heritage from the first European encounters with
aboriginal peoples to contemporary times, with
particular emphasis on the relationship between
Christianity and the broad socio-political and
intellectual history of the nation.
HIST 561 History of Christianity I (3
sem. hrs.)
A study of the history of the Christian Church
from the turn of the first century to the eve of the
sixteenth century Reformation with attention to
the persons, events, and issues involved in the
major developments of Christianity.

HIST 562 History of Christianity II (3
sem. hrs.)
Surveys the development of the Christian Church
from the late medieval period through to the early
twenty-first century. Key topics include: the
Protestant and Catholic Reformations; the Great
Awakenings and the rise of modern
Evangelicalism, Fundamentalism, and the growth
of modern missionary movements, along with a
consideration of significant individuals, changes in
theology, institutions, devotional practices, gender
roles, and attempts to engage and shape culture.

HIST 581 The Politics of Identity: The
Arab Middle East in the Twentieth
Century (3 sem. hrs.)
This course examines some of the major themes
in the history of the Arab Middle East since the
breakup of the Ottoman Empire following World
War I. Primary emphasis is on the role played by
issues of identity in the development of national
structures in the Arab East (Egypt, Syria,
Lebanon, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, and the Gulf States).
Major themes include the nature of Islamic
community, the structure and legacy of Ottoman
rule, the post- Ottoman settlement and the impact
of colonial rule, the emergence of nationalist
politics and the growth of the contemporary Arab
state system, oil and the politics of family rule in
the Gulf States, and the relationship between
religion and politics.

HIST 590 Special Topics in History (3
sem. hrs.)
Topics may vary. Courses offered to date include
Canada and War in the Twentieth Century.

HIST 592 Sugar, Slaves, Silver: The
Atlantic World, 1450-1850 (3 sem. hrs.)
Examines the Atlantic world during an era of
immense global change. Since the navigations of
the fifteenth century, the Atlantic has been a


                                                245
corridor for fundamental exchanges of peoples,
crops, technology, and ideas. Topics include early
maritime explorations, the destruction and
reconfiguration of indigenous societies, the labour
migrations of Europeans, Native Americans, and
Africans, slavery and the trans-Atlantic slave trade,
the establishment of an Atlantic economy, and the
maturation of Euro-American colonial societies
and their struggles for autonomy and national
independence.

HIST 600 History, Culture, and
Interpretation (3 sem. hrs.)
Designed to explore history as a discipline and a
form of knowledge. It examines the process and
the structure of how human societies have
interpreted, ordered, and used historical inquiry.
Major theoretical/philosophical traditions and
their historians are analyzed. Special attention is
paid to modern rational history with its focus on
the notion of progress and the challenges brought
about by the claims of postmodern interpretation-
based history with its emphasis on language, race,
ethnicity, gender, and environment. Furthermore,
it explores history’s impact on other disciplines
including philosophy, literary criticism, biology,
physics, and religious studies. Combines weekly
readings with selected guest lectures that explore
the ways in which history is understood in History
and in other disciplines.

HIST 606 History of the Family (3
sem. hrs.)
Examines the historical development of the family
beginning with the ancient world up to 1600. A
central inquiry is the formation of families and
households, as well the impact of religion on
gender and family roles. Also explores the use of
power and coercion in the organization of family,
and an inquiry into contemporary gender theory,
but concentrates on the lives and ideas of actual
persons insofar as the historical record reveals
them.

HIST 607 Special Topics in History (3
sem. hrs.)
Topics may vary. Courses offered to date include:
 • Decolonizing Gender in African History
 • First Nations-Canadians in B.C.
 • History of Arian Theology
 • History of the Celtic Church
  •   History of the Metis in Canada
  •   Introduction to Patristics Study
  •   Medieval Warfare
  •   Arian Theology
  •   Sacred Women in the Ancient World
  •   War, Peace, and International Law
  •   Gender and the Charter
  •   Transatlantic British Empire
  •   Christian Perspective on Israel

HIST 610 Research
Design/Bibliography Seminar (3 sem.
hrs.)
Under the direction of the student’s approved
thesis advisor, a course of reading and study which
leads to the development of both a significant
bibliographical essay (or annotated bibliography)
and a thesis proposal. The latter includes at least
the following: major question(s) to be addressed;
significance of the issue(s); methodologies to be
used; theories to be addressed and primary
sources to be examined.

HIST 611, 612 Thesis (3 sem. hrs.)

HIST 613 Major Essay (3 sem. hrs.)
Under the direction of a supervisor, students who
do not do a thesis, research and write a major
paper of approximately 10,000–15,000 words in
length.

HIST 618 Popular Religion in Europe
Students examine, through readings, discussion,
and student presentations, the way that men and
women in Europe circa 1300 to 1700 embraced
alternative religious beliefs, some of which were
accepted and domesticated by the Catholic or
protestant institutional churches, while others
were rejected and persecuted as heresy and/or
witchcraft by both. Students also evaluate
different historiographical and methodological
approaches to the study of heterodoxy.

HIST 619 The Renaissance Mind
This course examines the period of transition and
turmoil in European history, from approximately
1360 to 1550, known as the Renaissance. As the
cultural synthesis of the high middle ages was
crumbling, poets, philosophers, artists, architects,
theologians, and statesmen in search of a fresh



                                                 246
model for society rejected the late medieval
scholastic worldview and embraced a new
educational program, the studia humanitatis, based
on a re-evaluation and revival of classical culture.
This transition affected not only literature, the
arts, the sciences, religion, and government, but
virtually every other sphere of human activity.
Therefore, this course, while providing an in-
depth, interdisciplinary introduction to the key
topics of humanism, religion, political theory, and
changes in high culture, also investigates the issues
of gender, economic development, and social
history during this period. It also assesses different
methodological approaches to the study of the
Renaissance.

HIST 661 History of non-Western
Christianity (3 sem. hrs.)
During the twentieth century, it became clear that
the majority of Christians worldwide were not
Europeans or North Americans but Latin
Americans, Africans, and Asians. Some observers
interpret this as a major shift in the very nature of
Christianity, but others view it as the renewal of
what is essentially a non-Western religion. Instead
of representing an entirely new development, they
see the twentieth century growth of Christianity as
a return to the history of Christianity before 1200-
1400 AD when Europe developed as its dominant
heartland. By means of readings, guest lectures,
and student seminar presentations, this course
examines aspects of non-Western Christianity
including early origins, struggles with Islam, the
impact of European imperialism and missions,
and factors involved in the accelerated growth in
many parts of the world since the mid-twentieth
century.

HIST 670 Pre-Nicene Christianity (3
sem. hrs.)
This course examines in detail the background and
development of Christian thought and life in the
period spanning the Apostolic Fathers through to
the Council of Nicaea (325). Particular attention is
paid to how the early Christians understood
themselves, how they interpreted their religious
tradition and related it to their religious
experience, and how they defined their own
purposes. This course seeks to contextualize pre-
Christianity in its diverse expressions. Thus, the
course analyzes the complex formulation of Pre-
Nicene Christianity through the writings of some
of its most influential thinkers, leaders, and
movements (both orthodox and heretical) with an
eye toward identifying major developments in
early Christian theology and practice.

Cross-listed: RELS 670.

HIST 692 Villains and Wenches:
(Re)Conceiving the Atlantic World (3
sem. hrs.)
This course uses reading, discussion, and student
presentations to examine the ways that historians
have conceptualized the Atlantic World and those
who people it. It considers the very idea of the
Atlantic system as a framework for historical study
and the ways in which various historiographical
and methodological approaches have affected the
way we understand the people and events of the
Atlantic basin.



Human Kinetics
HKIN 100 Special Program (1 sem. hr.)

HKIN 101 Physical Conditioning (1
sem. hr.)

HKIN 102 Run for Fun (1 sem. hr.)

HKIN 103 Weight Training (1 sem.
hr.)

HKIN 104 Fitness for Living (1 sem.
hr.)

HKIN 105 Self-Defence (1 sem. hr.)

HKIN 107 Advanced Weight Training
(1 sem. hr.)

HKIN 108 Martial Arts (1 sem. hr.)

HKIN 120 Rock Climbing (1 sem. hr.)

HKIN 121 Hiking (1 sem. hr.)


                                               247
HKIN 135 Ropes Course (1 sem. hr.)

HKIN 136 Outdoor Pursuits I (1 sem.
hr.)

HKIN 137 Outdoor Pursuits II (1 sem.
hr.)

HKIN 143 Badminton (1 sem. hr.)

HKIN 145 Golf (1 sem. hr.)

HKIN 161 Basketball (1 sem. hr.)

HKIN 162 Volleyball (1 sem. hr.)

HKIN 163 Soccer (1 sem. hr.)

HKIN 121 Hiking (1 sem. hr.)
Students are introduced to a series of Saturday day
hiking trips in the local area and will develop
hiking skills and knowledge of technical skills.
Spiritual and personal discipline within an outdoor
environment is emphasized. Students will gain
experience of planning and executing day hikes
while keeping themselves and others safe.

Prerequisite(s): None.

HKIN 131 Track and Field (1 sem. hr.)
Basic instruction and knowledge in track and field
events; the recognition, analysis, and correction of
common errors; skill refinements.

Prerequisite(s): None.

HKIN 135 Ropes Course (1 sem. hr.)
Students will actively participate in ropes course
training, become knowledgeable of safety issues,
and develop expertise in an outdoor Ropes Course
environment. Both low and high rope course
elements will be utilized in providing physical
activities and experiential learning focusing on
developing trust, communication, and teamwork
skills.

Prerequisite(s): None.
HKIN 136 Outdoor Pursuits I (1 sem.
hr.)
Students are introduced to a variety of outdoor
recreational activities including wilderness skills,
knot tying, frisbee golf, TWU ropes course, and
environmental stewardship. Seasonal activities
may include kayaking and parkour. Activities are
accessible, local, and increase awareness of natural
environments, and one’s personal health and
fitness. Students will learn to engage in
responsible ways of experiencing the outdoors.

Prerequisite(s): None.

HKIN 191 Introduction to Exercise
Physiology (3 sem. hrs.)
Applied study of exercise factors: the
cardiovascular system, anthropometry, nutrition,
and environmental conditions. Emphasis on
assessment and prescription in laboratory sessions.

Prerequisite(s): None.

HKIN 195 Foundation of Human
Kinetics (3 sem. hrs.)
An introductory overview of the fields of human
kinetics and sport with an emphasis on the basic
knowledge necessary for leadership positions or
careers in these fields. Current issues and future
developments. Integration of biblical perspectives
in human kinetics and sport.

Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0; 0-0)

HKIN 201 Strength and Conditioning
(3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to the fundamentals, techniques,
and physiology of beginner and advanced strength
training and conditioning. Individual differences
in ability, experience and goals will be accounted
for in the design, implementation, and
maintenance of the student’s personal program.
Students will be equipped and encouraged to
consider strength and conditioning training as a
lifetime physical activity plan.

NB: Course not available to students who have
taken HKIN 101, 103, or 107. Students can only
receive credit for one of HKIN 201 or 202.
Prerequisite(s): None. (0-0; 0-3)



                                                248
HKIN 202 Total Fitness for Women (3
sem. hrs.)
An introduction to the fitness benefits and
applications of fundamentals, techniques and
physiology of strength and conditioning. Students
will improve their level of general fitness
throughout participation in a wide variety of
activities and increase interest in maintaining
personal fitness. Individual differences in ability,
experience, and goals will be accounted for in the
design, implementation, and maintenance of the
student’s personal program. Students will
participate in a combination of group and
individual activities as well as practical application
lectures.

NB: Course not available to students who have
taken HKIN 101, 103, or 107. Students can only
receive credit for one of HKIN 201 or 202.
Prerequisite(s): None. (0-0; 0-3)

HKIN 216 Journey: A TWU Outdoor
Experience (3 sem. hrs.)
Students will participate in an eight-day canoe trip
in Wells Gray Provincial Park, in mid-August,
where they will live in community, be self-
sustaining and challenge themselves physically,
emotionally, and spiritually. Preparation for the
trip will include group meetings from April to July
and two days of preparation and orientation on
campus prior to leaving for the trip in August.
Students will engage with a series of reading and
written assignments based on the eight course
principles. Those principles are well-being,
resilience and preparation, compassion, pacing,
perspective, self-reflection, experience, and (inter)
connection.

Prerequisite(s): Instructor’s permission via
application.

HKIN 235 Climbing Pursuits (3 sem.
hrs.)
Students are introduced to the skills and
knowledge required in recreational rock climbing
for both indoor and outdoor climbing
environments. Students will become
knowledgeable of group facilitation, high ropes
training, and safety issues while focusing on
personal development, trust, communication, and
teamwork skills.
NB: Course is not available to students who have
taken HKIN 120 or 135.
Prerequisite(s): None. (0-0; 0-3)

HKIN 260 Physical Growth and
Development (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of developmental principles and
theoretical approaches and issues related to the
study of human growth and development and
motor behaviour across the lifespan.

NB: Offered every other year.
Prerequisite(s): HKIN 191, 195. (0-0; 3-0)

HKIN 266 Indoor Team Sports (3 sem.
hrs.)
An introduction to understanding and playing the
indoor team sports of basketball and volleyball.
Personal development of sport-specific skills,
offensive and defensive game strategies,
teamwork, rules, and recreational play will be part
of performing and understanding each sport.

NB: Course is not available to students who have
taken HKIN 161 or 162.
Prerequisite(s): None. (0-0; 0-3)

HKIN 276 Psycho-Motor Learning (3
sem. hrs.)
An examination of concepts and the practice of
learning motor skills and a theoretical basis for
developing effective motor skill learning and
teaching strategies.

Prerequisite(s): None. (3-1; 0-0)

HKIN 277 Technological Applications
in Human Kinetics and Recreation (3
sem. hrs.)
A study of computers, technology, information
systems, electronic research, communication,
distance education, video conferencing, and
specific software packages related to the sport and
recreation domain.

Prerequisite(s): None. (1-1; 3-1)

HKIN 280 Foundations of Coaching (3
sem. hrs.)



                                                   249
An introduction to the field of coaching, including
the role of the coach, responsibilities from
planning through evaluation, and relationships
with the team and other groups. An analysis of
problems and issues in coaching. NCCP theory
certification is available.

Prerequisite(s): None. (0-0; 3-0)

HKIN 292 Social Determinations of
Health and Physical Activity (3 sem.
hrs.)
An introductory course to the social determinants
that influence the health of persons and
communities, with partial emphasis on those
determinants that influence physical activity
engagement.

Prerequisites: None.

HKIN 298 Introduction to
Biomechanics (3 sem. hrs.)
An applied study of the mechanical, anatomical,
and biological components of human movement
including sport and active daily living activities.

Prerequisite(s): HKIN 191. (3-0; 3-0)

HKIN 303 Advanced Principles of
Strength Training (3 sem. hrs.)
Students experience an in-depth study of the
theoretical foundations and practical applications
of strength training and program development.
This course focuses on the
neuromuscular/biomechanical basis of strength
training: adaptations to resistance training; systems
of strength development; and program design
variables.

NB: HKIN 103 or 107 can be taken
simultaneously.
Prerequisite(s): HKIN 103 or 107 or 201 or 202;
191, 298; BIOL 241; third year standing. (0-0; 3-1)

HKIN 320 Management and Facilities
(3 sem. hrs.)
This course is designed to give the student a broad
understanding of recreational management and
facilities management. Topics include personnel
management, fundraising, budgeting, public
relations, promotion, use of volunteers,
administration practices, legal requirements,
facility planning, and parks management.

NB: Offered every other year.
Prerequisite(s): Instructor’s permission. (0-0; 3-
0)

HKIN 325 Sociocultural and
Philosophical Aspects of Sport and
Leisure (3 sem. hrs.)
An examination of the sociological, cultural, and
philosophical dynamics of sport and the way that
sport has become a significant socializing agent of
society and culture. Sport issues and controversies
are explored in depth to assist the human kinetics
practitioner in applying critical thinking and
critical decision-making in the realm of sport and
physical activity.

Prerequisite(s): Third year standing. (3-0; 0-0)

HKIN 340 Psychology of Sport and
Exercise (3 sem. hrs.)
The need for and purpose of psychology in sport
and physical activity. An examination of the
research focusing on psychological and social
psychological factors influencing athletic and
motor performance.

Cross-listed: PSYC 360.
Prerequisite(s): Third year standing. (3-0 or 3-0)

HKIN 342 Dance Explorations (3 sem.
hrs.)
Students are introduced to the theoretical and
practical application of dance through technique,
improvisation, and choreographic principles in
order to develop a movement vocabulary.
Emphasis will be given to teaching techniques and
the choreographic process through the principles
of design, space, dynamics, and relationship of
form to content. Students will be given a practical
introduction to dance appropriate in physical
education programs. Opportunity will be given to
explore and develop movement as an expressive
and artistic language through individual and group
work. The class will draw on human experience,
faith experience, music, story, parable, and
scripture as a jumping off point for improvisation.
A philosophical and biblical foundation for the


                                                250
integration of movement in education will be
examined. The concepts of context and intention
will be explored through viewing, participating in,
and analyzing various forms of dance.

Prerequisite(s): Third year standing. (0-0; 0-3)

HKIN 350 Teaching Physical
Education (3 sem. hrs.)
Teaching methodology and curriculum for
physical education instruction. An introduction to
lesson planning, active living, movement skills,
and safety, fair play, and leadership as it applies to
students in a school physical education program.

Cross-listed: EDUC 350.
Prerequisite(s): Third year standing. (3-0; 3-0)

HKIN 351 Leadership and
Management in Human Kinetics (3
sem. hrs.)
An applied study of leadership, including
planning, supervisory skills, and responsibilities
related to instructional/intramural-recreational
and intercollegiate human kinetics and sport
programs.

Prerequisite(s): Third year standing. (0-0; 3-0)

HKIN 372 Athletic Injuries (3 sem.
hrs.)
The theory and practice of the prevention,
assessment, management, and rehabilitation of
athletic injuries. Emergency care, nutrition, and
taping skills.

Prerequisite(s): BIOL 241 or instructor’s
consent; third year standing. (0-0; 3-1)

HKIN 375 Research Methods (3 sem.
hrs.)
An introduction to research and measurement in
sport and human kinetics. Emphasis is placed on
practical application of research techniques and
designs as well as measurement techniques related
to a variety of sport and human kinetics settings.

Prerequisite(s): MATH 102, MATH 108 or
PSYC 207. (3-0, 0-0)
HKIN 396 The Olympic Games
Movement (3 sem. hrs.)
NB: Not offered every year. Usually offered in
conjunction with attendance at Summer Olympic
Games. See Dean for details.
Prerequisite(s): HKIN 195 and second year
standing or instructor’s approval. (3-0 or 3-0)

HKIN 400 Directed Study (3 sem. hrs.)
Students will explore an in-depth research study of
a human kinetics topic in consultation with a
supervising human kinetics professor.

Prerequisite(s): Fourth year standing or
instructor’s permission. (3-0 or 3-0)

HKIN 420 Sport and Exercise
Nutrition (3 sem. hrs.)
The analysis and application of sport and exercise
nutrition. Emphasis is placed on nutrition
coaching, diet, supplementation, and ergogenics
most appropriate to health, body composition,
sport, and exercise performance.

Prerequisite(s): HKIN 191 and third year
standing. (3-0; 0-0)

HKIN 440 Applied Mental Skills in
Sport and Fitness (3 sem. hrs.)
The direct application of select mental skills to
sport and physical activity. A strong emphasis is
placed on how to apply mental skills in a variety of
settings.

NB: Offered every other year.
Prerequisite(s): HKIN 340. (0-0; 3-0)

HKIN 446 Advanced Human Anatomy
(3 sem. hrs.)
An in-depth study of human anatomy with a focus
on the appendicular and axial skeleton and upper
and lower body muscle: identification, origin,
insertion and function, vascular and neural supply,
surface anatomy and joint structure.

Prerequisite(s): BIOL 241 and third year
standing.
HKIN 453 Adapted Physical Activity (3
sem. hrs.)



                                                 251
Students will gain an understanding of the
biopsychosocial considerations and environmental
modifications required to facilitate quality physical
activity participation for individuals with various
physical and/or mental impairments.

Prerequisite(s): Third year standing or
instructor’s consent. (3-0; 0-0)

HKIN 465 Physical Activity and Aging
(3 sem. hrs.)
Students will examine the theories of aging and
the topics and issues associated with physical
activity and recreation for older adults.

Prerequisite(s): Third or fourth year standing or
instructor permission. (3-0 or 3-0)

HKIN 470 Exercise Physiology (3 sem.
hrs.)
An applied study of the effects of exercise on
body systems as related to the functional capacity
of individual systems to maximal human
performance. Principles and methods of
conducting and developing physical exercise and
training programs.

NB: Offered every other year.
Prerequisite(s): HKIN 191, BIOL 241, or
instructor’s consent; third year standing. (3-1; 0-0)

HKIN 475 Clinical Exercise
Physiology (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of the clinical aspects of exercise
physiology by examining the relationship between
exercise and chronic disease. Cardiorespiratory,
metabolic, neuromuscular, immunological, and
musculoskeletal conditions are explored with
respect to physiology, pathophysiology, and
pharmacotherapy along with exercise testing,
prescription, safety, and programming issues. (0-0;
3-0)

Prerequisite(s): BIOL 241

HKIN 492 Health Promotion (3 sem.
hrs.)
A study of developmental principles and
theoretical approaches and issues related to the
study of human growth and development and
motor behaviour across the lifespan.

Prerequisite(s): HKIN 292, third year standing;
Recommended: a course in research methods
and/or statistics. (0-0; 3-0)

HKIN 495 Senior Seminar (3 sem. hrs.)
A course offered on topics of current interest in
sport performance and human kinetics. Under
supervision of faculty, students conduct a careful
review of the literature on a topic of their choice
and prepare a substantial paper. Final student
papers are presented in the form of an oral
presentation.

Prerequisite(s): Fourth year standing plus 12
sem. hrs. of HKIN theory. (0-0; 3-0)

HKIN 355A Core Teaching
Experience I (1 sem. hr.)

HKIN 355B Core Teaching
Experience I (2 sem. hrs.)

HKIN 455A Core Teaching
Experience II (1 sem. hr.)

HKIN 455B Core Teaching
Experience II (2 sem. hrs.)

HKIN 456A Core Teaching
Experience III (1 sem. hr.)

HKIN 456B Core Teaching
Experience III (2 sem. hrs.)

HKIN 457A Coaching Experience I (1
sem. hr.)

HKIN 457B Coaching Experience II
(2 sem. hrs.)

HKIN 458A Approved Leadership
Experience I (1 sem. hr.)

HKIN 458B Approved Leadership
Experience II (2 sem. hr.)


                                                 252
HKIN 459 Sport and Leisure
Management Experience (3 sem. hr.)
HKIN 460 Sport and Leisure
Management Experience (3 sem. hrs.)


Humanities
HUMA 130 Introduction to Law
Law plays an important role in Canada, including
in structuring and regulating the interactions
between governments, between governments and
private individuals, and between private
individuals. This course provides an introduction
to the Canadian legal system. Topics to be
examined include: the nature, types and sources of
Canadian law, the organization of the legal
profession, the Canadian court system, and
specific branches of law, such as contract and
torts. The course will provide a basic
understanding of the Canadian legal system and
the practice of law, as well as a greater
appreciation of law in Canadian society. The
course will also examine the significant Christian
influences to the development of our law, rule of
law, and system of government. (3-0; 3-0)

Prerequisite(s): None.

HUMA 390 Special Topics in the
Humanities (3 sem. hrs.)
An examination of special topics or issues in the
humanities which are not considered in depth in
other courses.

Prerequisite(s): Third year standing.

HUMA 607 Special Topics in the
Humanities (3 sem. hrs.)
Topics may vary.

Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Masters in
Interdisciplinary Humanities program and
instructor’s consent.
Interdisciplinary
Studies
IDIS 201 Indigenous People of Turtle
Island (3 sem. hrs.)
This course investigates the origins of Indigenous
people of Turtle Island and Canada's relationship
with Indigenous peoples. In particular, it evaluates
Canada's present relationship with the Stó:lō
people. The course explores and analyzes the
concepts of sovereignty and socio-cultural
worldview and identifies the place and centrality
of the Stó:lō people in Canada. The course will
survey current Stó:lō people/settler religious
encounters, consider important local themes,
names, and stories, identify significant issues of
interpretation, and reflect on possible future paths
for Stó:lō/settler peoples. (3,0)

Prerequisite(s): None.

IDIS 400 Developing a Christian
Worldview (3 sem. hrs.)
This is an interdisciplinary studies course that
addresses a topic of significance and
contemporary concern. Faculty from several
disciplines participate, as well as others who have
expertise in the topic but who are not faculty
members at TWU.
Prerequisite(s): Third- or fourth year standing
and completion of at least 70 sem. hrs. of study by
end of preceding semester. (3-0; 0-0)

IDIS 410 Influencing the Changing
Workplace: An Interdisciplinary
Christian Perspective (3 sem. hrs.)
This course motivates students to explore ways in
which they can have an impact for God’s kingdom
in a rapidly changing world economic
environment. It gives students the opportunity to
integrate disciplines in the liberal arts and religious
studies, as well as business administration and
economics, so as to provide them with a biblically-
based worldview and set of strategies for
influencing the workplace in which they are called
by God to serve.




                                                   253
Prerequisite(s): Completion of at least 84 sem.
hrs. of study by end of preceding semester. The
course is required for business majors; non-
business students with the minimum prerequisite
are welcome. (3-0 or 3-0)

IDIS 420 Arts, Media and Culture
London Travel Study
A three-week interdisciplinary fine arts study trip
to London, England, in which students critically
engage culture and the fine arts. Visits to galleries,
performances, and cultural sites accompany
lectures and readings to encourage students to
develop and deepen their biblically informed view
of the role of fine arts. While most course
activities take place in London proper, several day
trips to surrounding locations are included.

NB: Summer travel study course. This course is
for students wishing to take this course for credit.
It meets both the Fine Arts and IDIS 400
equivalent core requirements (provided students
choose this as their “double-counted” core
requirement) although the total credits for the
course is 3 sem. hrs. No prior courses in art,
theatre, or music are necessary. Another course,
often Music 310, is offered on the travel study.
Cross-listed: SAMC 420.
Prerequisite(s): 70 sem. hrs. of study and
permission of the instructor.

IDIS 430 Christian Values in a Global
Community (3 sem. hrs.)
This course explores the nature and scope of a
Christian worldview by means of a three-week
interdisciplinary study trip to Geneva and Rome.
Specifically, the course explores historical and
contemporary religious and international issues—
such as ecumenical dialogue, human rights, world
hunger and refugees—through the perspective of
church and governmental agencies based in these
two cities.

NB: Summer travel study course. This is an
approved alternative to IDIS 400.
Prerequisite(s): 70 sem. hrs. of study and
permission of the instructor.

IDIS 440 Perspectives within the
Global Sport Community (3 sem. hrs.)
This course explores the nature and scope of
worldview perspectives by means of an
interdisciplinary study trip. Specifically, the course
explores historical and contemporary sport and
international issues such as elite training,
sportsmanship, drugs and sport, coaching, etc.
The course seeks to establish some of the
historical, religious, philosophical, and art ties
between the relative culture and sports and to
relate these values and practices to our Western
culture. By exposing students to theory and
practical experience related to major global
sporting events, the course attempts to assist
students to understand the importance of thinking
about an issue from an interdisciplinary viewpoint
and integrating knowledge into a comprehensive
world view.

NB: Summer travel study course. This is an
approved alternative to IDIS 400.

IDIS 450 Transformational
Development and Leadership (3 sem.
hrs.)
The course provides opportunity for the
articulation of transformational leadership (both
cultural and personal). Students become wise to
effective leadership communication as they
examine worldview, history, and economic
challenges in various global regions. This course
explores underlying cultural and faith-based
worldviews by means of an interdisciplinary travel
study. Specifically, the course explores social and
humanitarian responses to critical social issues.
Through readings, lectures (including field
practitioners and experts), and field experiences,
students are exposed to the complex nature of
human problems and societal responses. Students
seek to understand critical social issues in light of
cultural, environmental, economic, political, and
historical frameworks. Of particular interest is the
manner in which religious world view shapes one’s
response to the disadvantaged, and how the
transformational model informs leadership
behaviour and the development process.

NB: This course functions as an alternative to
IDIS 400.
Cross-listed: MCOM 491.
Prerequisite(s): Upper level standing (minimum
of 70 sem. hrs.) and instructor's consent.



                                                  254
IDIS 493 Law, Public Policy, and
Cultural Change (3 sem. hrs.)
This course will provide students with theoretical
and practical frameworks in the areas of law and
public policy to engage with social and global
issues. Students will explore the intersection of
law, politics, and culture in the setting of Canada’s
capital. Students will critique culture and identify
positive ways Christians engage and shape culture,
particularly in public policy and law. They will
explore how law and public policy are developed
through observing courts and Parliament in
action. Students will identify a critical problem in
society and suggest ways to resolve this problem
through law and public policy that is consistent
with core Christian beliefs.

Cross-listed: POLS 493.
Prerequisite(s): Admission into Laurentian
Leadership Centre. (3-0 or 3-0)

IDIS 495 Critical Issues in Education
and Culture (3 sem. hrs.)
A consideration and analysis of selected critical
concerns in education that link and interact with
broad issues in culture and society. The course
emphasizes how worldview thinking across
various disciplines affects societal approaches to
questions such as religion and ethics in the
schools, the influence of technology and media on
education, and plurality and choice in schooling.

NB: Approved alternative to IDIS 400; required
for all education students.
Cross-listed: EDUC 495.
Prerequisite(s): EDUC 203; fourth year
standing; minimum cumulative GPA of 2.5. (3-0;
0-0)

Other courses that are approved alternatives to
IDIS 400:
  • HIST 411 History, Culture, and Interpreting
      the Past.
  • PSYC 490 Personhood: An Interdisciplinary
      Examination of the Individual.
  • RELS 476 Christian World Views in
      Historical and Cultural Context.
Japanese
JAPA 101, 102 Introduction to Japanese
(3, 3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to modern Japanese language and
culture for students with no knowledge of
Japanese. Basic listening, speaking, reading, and
writing skills are taught, along with cultural
components. Includes instruction on using
computer software to produce Japanese scripts on
an English keyboard.

NB: Native Japanese speakers or students who
have studied Japanese at this level may not take
these courses for credit. Higher levels may be
offered by directed study. For more information,
contact the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): None for 101; JAPA 101 is a
prerequisite for 102. (3-1; 3-1)

JAPA 201, 202 Intermediate Japanese I
& II (3, 3 sem. hrs.)
In this course, students study modern Japanese,
both oral and written, at the intermediate level.
They continue to learn basic grammar principles
through the study of increasingly complex
sentence patterns and memorize Chinese
characters, called “Kanji” in Japanese. Classes
include reading, conversational activities, and
listening practice in the lab. Cultural components
are also included.

NB: Presently offered as a directed study.
Prerequisite(s): JAPA 102 or instructor’s
permission; JAPA 201 for 202.

JAPA 301, 302 Intermediate Japanese
III & IV (3, 3 sem. hrs.)
In these courses, students study modern Japanese,
both oral and written, at the high intermediate
level. They continue to learn essential grammar
principles through the study of increasingly
complex sentence patterns. They also memorize
Chinese characters, called “Kanji” in Japanese.
Classes include reading, conversational activities,
and listening practice in the lab. Cultural
components are included.

NB: Presently offered as a directed study.



                                                255
Prerequisite(s): JAPA 202 for JAPA 301; JAPA
301 for 302.

JAPA 399 Japanese Religion and
Spirituality (3 sem. hrs.)
Investigates the complex and fascinating world of
Japanese religions through experiential cultural
and historical inquiry. Students are encouraged to
analyze and reflect on the development of
Japanese religious traditions up to the beginning
of the twenty-first century, investigating the
formation of a typically Japanese belief system
which is based on Shinto Buddhism, and
evaluating the development of doctrines and
practices which have been most influential in
Japanese history, including the relations between
religious institutions and centres of political
power, particularly during the Second World War.

Prerequisite(s): None.



Latin
LATN 211 Latin I
An introduction to the Latin language. As Latin is
the official language of the Roman Catholic
Church, students will learn the religious,
philosophical, and theological influences of Latin
through texts, prayers, and hymns. Students will
also acquire an understanding of the mechanics of
Latin, learning Latin phonetics, morphology, and
syntax.

NB: taught at Catholic Pacific College, an
approved TWU learning centre.
Prerequisite(s): None.

LATN 212 Medieval Ecclesiastical
Latin (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to Latin grammar and the basic
vocabulary of medieval ecclesiastical Latin. The
one- or two-semester program of study is
designed to prepare the student for independent
reading in Jerome’s Latin Vulgate, the Summa
Theologiae of Thomas Aquinas, and other
medieval texts of moderate difficulty.

NB: taught at Catholic Pacific College, an
approved TWU learning centre.
Prerequisite(s): LATN 211. (3-0; 3-0)

LATN 311, 312 Advanced Readings in
Latin (3, 3 sem. hrs.)
This course illustrates advanced topics in Latin
grammar by allowing the student to study and
translate advanced Latin texts. Some of the texts
are chosen by the student in consultation with the
instructor in order to become familiar with
specialized study in a Latin author of choice.

NB: Course taught at Catholic Pacific College, an
approved TWU learning centre.
Prerequisite(s): LATN 211 and 212. LATN 311
is required for 312. (3-0; 3-0)



Leadership
LDRS 110 Christian Leadership
Foundations (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to historical, biblical, and
contemporary concepts and practices of
leadership, and how they are understood and
applied within Christian organizations.

Prerequisite(s): Must be enrolled in Certificate in
Leadership for Christian Organizations.

LDRS 205 Leading Spiritual Growth (3
sem. hrs.)
An exploration of major historical movements of
Christian spirituality, the different ways people
relate to God, and the leadership principles and
practices of encouraging people to grow in
spiritual maturity.

Prerequisite(s): LDRS 110 or permission of
instructor, and must be enrolled in Certificate in
Leadership for Christian Organizations.

LDRS 210 Growing Healthy
Organizations (3 sem. hrs.)
An exploration of the developmental aspects of
leading organizational growth, including theories
of organization and change, principles of
governance, and approaches to organizing work.




                                                256
Prerequisite(s): LDRS 110 or permission of
instructor, and must be enrolled in Certificate in
Leadership for Christian Organizations.

LDRS 220 Leading with Numbers (3
sem. hrs.)
Students develop confidence in using quantitative
inquiry within organizational leadership contexts
to understand how and when numbers are used to
support positions people make.

Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0 or 3-0)

LDRS 230 Leading Teams and Groups
(3 sem. hrs.)
A practical study of how leaders guide, influence,
and respond to group dynamics and the best
practices utilized in leading and developing teams
and groups in organizations.

Prerequisite(s): LDRS 110 or permission of
instructor and must be enrolled in Certificate in
Leadership for Christian Organizations.

LDRS 255 Leading and Coaching (3
sem. hrs.)
An exploration of whole person development in
the practice of coaching and mentoring individuals
toward self-understanding, strong character, high
performance, and well-being within organizational
contexts.

Prerequisite(s): LDRS 110 or permission of
instructor, and must be enrolled in Certificate in
Leadership for Christian Organizations.
LDRS 300 Leadership as Service (3
sem. hrs.)
This course is designed for students who wish to
advance their understanding of leadership and
enhance their personal leadership skills, attitudes,
and behaviours in keeping with the mission of
TWU. It introduces students to the literature of
leadership, helps them design tools for assessing
their own leadership abilities, and enables them to
develop a Christian servant leadership model
within the context of a Christian worldview. Team
building and self-assessment exercises, leadership
presentations, case studies, and field research are
included.
Prerequisite(s): Second year standing or above.
(0-0; 3-0)

LDRS 301 Lifelong Learning Strategies
in Leadership (2 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to learning in the contexts of
academic studies and personal growth for a
lifetime of success as a leadership student and
practicing leader. Emphasis is given to exploring
three themes: (a) understanding the self as leader,
(b) understanding the role of learning in leading,
and (c) understanding leadership studies.

Prerequisite(s): None.

LDRS 302 Historical Concepts and
Theories in Leadership (3 sem. hrs.)
An exploration of what leaders can learn from the
past to understand contemporary leadership and
to imagine future ways of leading. Students are
provided with the opportunity to use the historical
method, including primary sources, to understand
past leaders and leadership thought. Emphasis is
given to the social circumstances and
philosophical ideas that led to the Classical and
Scientific Management theories, and subsequent
leadership theories emerging through to the 1980s.

Prerequisite(s): Third year standing or
permission of instructor.

LDRS 303 Contemporary and Popular
Approaches in Leadership (3 sem. hrs.)
An overview of contemporary approaches in
leadership from the 1990s to present day,
including practices that focus on psychodynamics,
individual and organizational values, ethical
relations, teamwork, emotional and social
intelligence, and other aspects that have helped
define current interpretations of leadership.

Prerequisite(s): Third year standing or
permission of instructor.

LDRS 310 The Learning Organization
(3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to the leadership concepts and
practices of developing leaders, teams, and
organizations, exploring the leader’s role in
facilitating both individual and team‐based



                                                257
learning and innovation processes with an
emphasis given to action learning.

Prerequisite(s): Third year standing or
permission of instructor.

LDRS 320 Ethical Decision-Making (3
sem. hrs.)
An exploration of the leader’s decision‐making
practice, including the relation to problem‐
analysis, decision‐making techniques, and ethical
considerations. Emphasis is given to a critical
examination of individual, organizational, and
macro‐level issues in ethics, and exploring the role
of values and ethics in the leader’s formulation of
strategies for motivating, communicating, utilizing
power, and developing followers.

Prerequisite(s): Third year standing or
permission of instructor.

LDRS 330 Leadership in
Organizations and Small Groups (3
sem. hrs.)
Comprehensive understanding of leadership.
Theories, models, facets of leadership, and
characteristics of effective leaders. Leadership
development and current issues.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: PSYC 330.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 105, 106, or instructor’s
consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

LDRS 375 Culture and Christianity (3
sem. hrs.)
This course examines important aspects of
Christianity’s involvement in global culture.
Alternative models and historical examples of this
involvement are considered as well as the
engagement of Christianity with specific current
social and cultural issues.

Prerequisite(s): LDRS 301 or permission of
instructor.

LDRS 391, 392, 393, 394 Supervised
Leadership Experience (3, 3, 3, 3 sem.
hrs.)
These courses are designed to provide a critical
examination of a leadership topic or area through
one’s personal involvement in leadership practice.
Readings emphasize leadership theory, personal
reflection, and the application of leadership
principles. These courses involves both a critical
examination of leadership and an investigation of
one’s personal strengths. Leadership practice is
structured to provide a context to apply leadership
theory, personally reflect on the theory and
application, and learn how to be a more effective
leader through interaction with a leadership
facilitator.

Prerequisite(s): Permission of instructor.

LDRS 400 Interpersonal Leadership:
Negotiation and Conflict Resolution (3
sem. hrs.)
Students learn to identify conflict sources within,
and outside organizations related to personal
differences, real and imagined levels of power, and
stakeholder interests. Forms of dispute resolution
are discussed including professional arbitration
and alternative methods of mediation, with
recognition that conflicts can be beneficial.

Prerequisite(s): Third year standing or
permission of instructor.

LDRS 410 Communication: Methods
and Mediums of Persuasion and
Positive Influence (3 sem. hrs.)
Communication within an organization impacts
directly/indirectly and internally/externally in four
directions: colleagues, subordinates, superiors, and
current and potential customers. All successful
leaders are competent communicators and seek
ways to develop their skills. This course provides a
broad overview of communications and offers
learners practical tools to improve their rapport
with various audiences.

Prerequisite(s): Third year standing or
permission of instructor.

LDRS 420 Leading Change (3 sem.
hrs.)
Leaders need to understand change in order to
lead change. This course enables students to



                                                 258
understand the impact of change, develop a better
sense of leading complex change, and learn about
various change process models, frameworks,
and engagement principles to gain commitment
and involvement. Students also develop an
understanding of how to coach in the midst of
change. Using a nine-phase change process model,
students apply their learning to a change project or
initiative.

Prerequisite(s): Third year standing or
permission of instructor.

LDRS 431 Building Leaders I:
Developing Intergenerational Leaders
(1 sem. hr.)
An examination of the universal process of human
development from a psycho-social perspective in
order to understand personal responses to
leadership and the perspective-taking
requirements of the leader in leading others. This
course provides an overview of different
generations (Baby Boomers, Gen Xers,
Millennials) and both their approach and
responses to leadership challenges with a view to
increasing the emotional intelligence of emerging
leaders.

Prerequisite(s): Third year standing or
permission of instructor.

LDRS 432 Building Leaders II:
Vocation and Career Planning (1 sem.
hr.)
An examination of leaders’ vocation discernment
and career planning in the context of both
modeling and mentoring. Emphasis is given to the
leaders’ identification of personal calling and the
creation of their career development plans and
how they use their self-development knowledge as
life mentors to those they lead, bringing others
toward personal and professional clarity and
growth.

Prerequisite(s): Third year standing or
permission of instructor.

LDRS 433 Building Leaders III:
Resilience in Leadership (1 sem. hr.)
An examination of everyday challenges and
weaknesses leaders face, and how to cope
effectively. This course focuses on approaches and
attitudes related to leadership aspects such as
criticism, failures, successes, personal attacks,
weaknesses, and persistence.

Prerequisite(s): Third year standing or
permission of instructor.

LDRS 440 Developing Administrative
Competence (3 sem. hrs.)
Students learn key principles and methods beyond
general strategies of leadership, which lead to
successful administration of private and public
organizations. This course provides the student
with an opportunity to apply learned leadership
principles of the program in the context of a
management application, thus demonstrating an
understanding of both management and
leadership, and acknowledging that a good leader
is also a good manager. Topics include preparing
strategic plans, modifying strategies, designing the
organization to fit objectives, organizational
governance, staffing the organization, budget
building and defending, risk management and due
diligence, and effective implementation of plans.

Prerequisite(s): None.

LDRS 490 Leading in the World (3
sem. hrs.
Students are invited to use the discipline of
leadership as a mode of inquiry to explore the
relation between the leader as a person and the
social world where the leader seeks to intervene.
Emphasis is given to how a leader’s awareness of
human uniqueness and interconnectedness is
practically expressed in, and informed by, social
ways of relating respectfully to all others in order
to create positive transformations in the
workplace and society, locally, nationally, and
globally.

Prerequisite(s): Third year standing or
permission of instructor.

LDRS 491, 493 Leadership Practicum I
(2, 3 sem. hrs.)
Students are engaged in an experiential learning
opportunity within a practical setting to apply


                                                 259
knowledge and skills they have gained in their
B.A. in Leadership studies. Applied projects are
developed within the supervised environment of a
business, non-profit agency, social service agency,
or other institution related to the student’s
personal interests and future plans.

Prerequisite(s): Third year standing or
permission of instructor.

LDRS 492, 494 Leadership Practicum
II (2, 3 sem. hrs.)
Students are engaged in an experiential learning
opportunity within a practical setting to apply
knowledge and skills they have gained in their
B.A. in Leadership studies. Applied projects are
developed within the supervised environment of a
business, non‐profit agency, social service agency,
or other institution related to the student’s
personal interests and future plans.

Prerequisite(s): Third year standing or
permission of instructor, and the completion of at
least 3 leadership courses.

LDRS 499 Applied Leadership Project
(3 sem. hrs.)
The applied leadership project provides students
with an opportunity in which to test and apply the
skills learned in their practicum placement as well
as to reflect on their own personal development as
professionals. Students conduct their applied
leadership project in a supervised business, non-
profit agency, social service agency, or institution
related to their personal interests and future plans
(preferably in the same setting as they completed
their practicum). This self-directed, but practicum-
facilitated project helps the students reflect on and
integrate their knowledge with practical
experience.

Prerequisite(s): Completion of at least 75
percent of the major coursework and practica.



Leadership,
Graduate Courses
LDRS 500 Leadership Foundations (3
sem. hrs.)
This introductory course provides an
understanding of the philosophical and theoretical
basis for leadership, including the participant’s
stage of development. Major historical models for
leadership are examined with special attention to
servant leadership. Participants also examine ways
of improving their own leadership skills through
practical interactive group exercises.

LDRS 501 Strategic Leadership (3 sem.
hrs.)
The student gains an appreciation of practical
visioning and strategic leadership with an
emphasis on understanding strategic leadership
framework, integrating new leadership knowledge,
using different strategic perspectives, appreciation
of strategy-making process and factors, developing
workplace application skills, acquiring
development tools and the integration of
transformational servant leadership skills
throughout.

LDRS 502 Team Leadership and
Conflict Resolution (3 sem. hrs.)
This course prepares those currently in leadership
positions to assess and develop their abilities to
coach and develop teams, manage conflict by
building relationship, and turn confrontation into
cooperation, as well as explore and experience
teamwork. Participants understand conflict theory
teamwork development, motivation, and
management strategies. As leaders and agents of
change, candidates analyze and formulate key
knowledge and skill areas that enable them to
construct the competencies of self-renewal,
communication, and understand how they interact
in a team. Development of these competencies
increase participants’ abilities to value people, and
thereby, increase the effectiveness of their
negotiation, intervention, and impact in a team
environment. The course is facilitative,
participatory, and experiential. Candidates
complete this course having experienced personal
change, and having the confidence and
competence to influence others through building
relationship, cooperative negotiation, and a greater
trust in a team environment.




                                                 260
LDRS 503 Results Based Leadership (3
sem. hrs.)
An analysis of organizational development and
operation in a leadership-based system for
performance results measurement and reporting:
terminology, concepts, and skill needs; the role of
a Christian perspective on financial accountability,
concepts, and principles; specific stakeholder
interests in defining data/information needs; key
elements and factors for quality business plans and
budgets; governance, financial leadership,
performance results measurement and reporting
strategies.

LDRS 504 Leadership Values and
Ethics (3 sem. hrs.)
This course focuses on enhancing ethical
awareness and practicing ethical leadership from a
Christian worldview perspective. Students
critically evaluate ethical frameworks and apply
dilemmas and cases to leadership. Participants
assess personal values, purpose, and vision in
relation to leadership and construct a personal
decision-making framework.

LDRS 591 Scholarly Inquiry (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course provides an overview of the process,
critical analysis, and associated skills required for
scholarship and research. This course is designed
for learners who may have little experience in the
area of research, and provides introduction to
scholarly inquiry and various research approaches
being used in the field of leadership to the end
that learners may become discriminating
consumers of research.

NB: This course is a prerequisite for LDRS 697.
The aim of this online course is to provide
students with the knowledge and skills necessary
for the completion of an ePortfolio, which serves
to integrate practical MA in Leadership program
curriculum content.

LDRS 611 Organizational Behaviour (3
sem. hrs.)
This is a graduate-level introduction to the social
theory and analysis of organizations. Process of
individual behaviour in organizations is examined,
including attitudes, motivation, satisfaction, stress,
perception, and attribution. Social behaviour
studies include group formation and structure,
socialization, organizational culture, and gender
dynamics. Attention is given to the evolution of
organizations along with the scaling or
organizational processes during growth, and the
consequent demands upon leaders as
organizations change.

LDRS 612 Leading Change and
Innovation (3 sem. hrs.)
This course is designed to deepen student’s
understanding of how transformational servant
leaders can and must survive and thrive while
leading change initiatives, leading for innovation,
and promoting new “ways of being” in twenty-
first century organizations. This is a time of
uncertainty and opportunity. Change and
innovation is about understanding and predicting
reality; it is about new strategic and operational
paradigms. Leading innovation requires different
ways of engaging people around issues, and new
personal, team, and organizational responses to
today’s world.

LDRS 614 Mission, Marketing, and
Quality (3 sem. hrs.)
An examination of marketing models and
frameworks including an initial exploration of
Christian worldview perspectives. The course
explores marketing as it is practised by North
American organizations (tools, techniques, and
frameworks used in market analysis and planning);
and engages in the marketing discipline through
the eyes of faith.

LDRS 617 Employee Engagement and
Stewardship (3 sem. hrs.)
This course examines the concept of employee
engagement within an organization in relation to
effective employee stewardship by the leadership
of that organization. It further considers effective
tools for the measurement and assessment of an
organization’s employee engagement and
stewardship practice, and methods for creating
and managing organizational culture characterized
by meaningful participation, loyalty, and
affirmation.




                                                261
LDRS 620 Worldview Foundations of
Educational Leadership (3 sem. hrs.)
This course examines the complex issue of the
Christian believer’s mandate to “indwell” the
Biblical story in the context of contemporary
western culture, paying particular attention to
ways in which this issue impacts the task of
educational leadership. Students will discuss the
potential of transformational servant leadership
and values-based leadership for building personal
and shared vision in educational settings. They will
develop and discuss strategies through which the
school leader can work reflectively with faculty,
parents, students, and others in establishing and
sustaining a vision-shaped educational community.
Students will also participate in a school leadership
self-assessment exercise.

NB: May not be taken for credit for students who
have credit for EDUC 621.
Cross-listed: EDUC 620.

LDRS 623 Developing and Assessing
Educational Programs (3 sem. hrs.)
This course reviews the foundations and practises
of both macro- and micro-level program
development for schools and school systems.
Students will consider the underlying assumptions
and effects of alternative approaches to program
planning. They will explore how worldviews shape
curriculum theory and analyze how they affect
curriculum development. They will also examine
contemporary issues and research problems
related to planned curriculum change and
development. The participants will develop a
framework and criteria for developing programs,
resources, and curriculum practice based on a
Christian worldview.
Cross-listed: EDUC 623.

LDRS 624 School Leadership and
Supervision (3 sem. hrs.)
In this course participants will review the role of
principals and other educational leaders in
nurturing a healthy professional climate and
sustaining teacher growth. They will develop an
integrated model for continuous staff
development. On the basis of the principles of
Christian servant leadership and current
supervision paradigms, they will consider how to
supervise and evaluate school personnel. They will
also scrutinize methods of staff selection,
induction, and dismissal. Throughout, the focus
will be on strategies for building positive school
cultures.

Cross-listed: EDUC 624.

LDRS 625 Educational Leadership and
Change (3 sem. hrs.)
This course involves an examination of the
characteristics of schools and classrooms that
provide an environment for productive instruction
and successful student learning within the
contours of a defined vision for education.
Included is an exploration of theories, current
research, and examples of constructive and
dynamic educational leadership. Learners will
analyze models, practices, and investigate how to
implement effective educational programs and
bring about related changes at the classroom and
institutional levels while overcoming barriers to
change.

Cross-listed: EDUC 625.

LDRS 626 Leadership for
Contemporary Issues in Education (3
sem. hrs.)
The school is a community for learning within a
larger community. This course explores the links
between schools and the social, political, and legal
forces that impinge on them. Students will
examine the relationship of the school with its
social context, and how school leaders interact
with external influences and affect them.

Cross-listed: EDUC 626.

LDRS 627 Theory and Practice of
Adult Education (3 sem. hrs.)
Learners will be introduced to principles and
practices of adult education. Focusing on
facilitation methods and instructional design, this
course develops practical skills necessary to teach
adults. Whether in a classroom or other formal
learning context or workplace, leaders are all
teachers. This course equips leaders to facilitate
transformational learning experiences that are
learner-centered, supportive, well-organized, and
based on critical inquiry in the context of practice.



                                                 262
LDRS 631 Health Care Leadership
Issues (3 sem. hrs.)
This course provides a foundation for students in
the health care stream and a comprehensive
application of servant leadership principles to the
health sector. As emerging leaders, students
develop their leadership skills in inspiring,
stewarding, and problem solving. The course
facilitates integrated learning on the needed
leadership competencies to support health systems
and organizations. The leadership competencies
include leading change, leading people, being
results driven, ensuring business acumen, and
building coalitions and communication.
Leadership issues in the course include values,
ideologies, leadership imperatives, cultural change,
population health, reform, vision, financial and
human resource considerations, education,
professional regulation, technology, and health
system integration.

LDRS 632 Leadership and Change (3
sem. hrs.)
This course explores how effective leaders use
creativity and innovation to address emerging
global needs. Necessary skills of cognitive load
management, cross-cultural collaboration,
interpersonal and communications skills, and
adaptability and resilience will be explored as tools
for leaders facing the need to promote new ways
of being for twenty-first century organizations.

LDRS 634 Accountability and
Performance (3 sem. hrs.)
When health service executives and professionals
are asked to explain what outcomes are being
achieved by the provincial and territorial health
systems across Canada, the reply is usually rhetoric
and platitudes, but with little evidence. The reality
is we do not have the ability to define what we
accomplish that costs approximately 44 percent of
the provincial and territorial budgets. This course
explores the concepts of accountability and
governance in detail. The collective goal is to
better explain what the health systems are
producing as tangible outcomes. Servant leaders
are called to communicate with the communities
and populations they serve with integrity and
honesty and to serve their patient/client/resident
needs as best they can, based on the organization’s
values and strategy, as well as the customer’s
expectations.

Prerequisite(s): LDRS 500.

LDRS 662 Culturally Inclusive
Teaching and Learning (3 sem. hrs.)
Learners will analyze personal cultural values and
beliefs, expanding their cultural self-awareness and
cultural competency. Learners will examine
implicit biases in educational structures and
processes, assess culturally-inclusive theoretical
perspectives, analyze inclusive pedagogy, and
explore global Indigenous perspectives on
teaching and learning. Learners will develop and
apply practical strategies to create culturally-
inclusive learning environments and learning
activities, and establish and develop meaningful
intercultural communication and relationships,
applying coaching/facilitation skills to engage all
learners in authentic learning experiences.

Prerequisite(s): LDRS 627.

LDRS 663 Coaching for
Transformational Blended Learning (3
sem. hrs.)
Examines the theoretical foundations and
professional practices of coaching learners in
blended learning environments with an emphasis
on facilitating transformational learning
experiences. The intersection of adult education,
educational technology, and international
education thought is investigated in relation to the
development of effective strategies for coaching
learners within the emerging context of
technologically distributed global higher
education. Projects develop digital literacy skills,
including the use of communication, collaboration
and publishing tools; and media literacy, including
knowledge of copyright, open licensing, and
digital citizenship.

Prerequisite(s): LDRS 627.

LDRS 664 Creating Authentic
Learning Communities (3 sem. hrs.)
Learners explore theoretical foundations of
learning communities, evaluate strategies for
creating authentic learning communities, and
apply those strategies in a learning/coaching


                                                 263
context. Learners explore teaching and learning
through the lens of personal transformation and
then widen their lens to consider systems theory
and challenges of leading for an authentic learning
environment. Learners explore themes such as
identity, perception, interconnectedness, and
learning organizations. Learners will develop a
personal philosophy of Learning Communities,
exploring what it means to be personally authentic
and how to lead authentically in a learning
environment.

Prerequisite(s): LDRS 627.

LDRS 667 Practicum (Personal and
Professional Practice and Reflection)
(3 sem. hr.)
Learners explore theoretical foundations of
learning communities, explore strategies for
creating authentic learning communities, and
apply strategies within a learning/coaching
context. This course provides students with a
practical setting in which to apply what they have
learned in the Certificate in Coaching and
Facilitation. Practicum must be with a supervised
business, non-profit agency, social service agency,
or institution related to the student’s personal
interests and future plans. The course includes
readings, written assignments and discussion
forums.

Prerequisite(s): LDRS 627.

LDRS 684 Leadership Integration
Thesis: Part 1 (3 sem. hrs.)
The Leadership Integration Thesis (Part 1)
provides opportunity for students to conduct
innovative independent leadership research. The
process of research—from identification of
problem for investigation, research design, data
collection and analysis, to written report of
findings—is the focus.

Prerequisite(s): LDRS 500 and 591.

LDRS 685 Leadership Integration
Thesis: Part 2 (3 sem. hrs.)
The Leadership Integration Thesis (Part 2)
provides opportunity for students to conduct
innovative independent leadership research. The
process of research—from identification of
problem for investigation, research design, data
collection and analysis, to written report of
findings—is the focus.

Prerequisite(s): LDRS 684.

LDRS 697, 698 (2, 2 sem. hrs.)
Leadership Integration Project I, II
LDRS 697 is a two-semester hour course that
together with LDRS 698 comprises the four
semester-hour Leadership integration project
capstone. The process of designing and
completing LDRS 697/698 is the practical
exercise of higher order learning processes. LDRS
697/698 is focused on integrating the learning
from various program courses into a
comprehensive understanding and personal
practice of leadership. The learnings of program
courses will be collectively analyzed and re-
evaluated to determine meta-themes to inform a
deeper level of scholarly inquiry in the field of
leadership. LDRS 697/698 represents the
capstone demonstration of a learner’s ability to
integrate practical program curriculum content
and to demonstrate achievement in the program’s
defined leadership competencies. The course
requires competent use of evidence-based
scholarly knowledge, ability to analyze an issue,
discipline in the problem-solving process, and
scholarly documentation and presentation of
information.



Linguistics
NB: Canada Institute of Linguistics courses are a part of
the linguistics program at Trinity Western University.
Students may pursue a major, concentration, or minor in
linguistics.

LING 101 Introduction to Linguistics
(3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to the primary elements of
linguistics, including an introduction to
morphology and semantics (words and meaning),
phonetics (the sounds of language), phonology
(the sound systems of language), syntax
(grammatical systems), sociolinguistics,
psycholinguistics, language acquisition theory, and



                                                      264
current issues in linguistics. No previous
knowledge of linguistics is required.

Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0; 3-0)

LING 210 Language and Society (3
sem. hrs.)
This course gives students the opportunity to
examine and interpret how the socio-cultural
context affects the way people speak in that
setting. Topics in focus include regional and social
dialects, multilingualism, language attitudes and
their impact on national and personal identity,
linguistic politeness, the maintenance, shift, loss,
and spread of languages, and the impact of
modern technology. Applications to gender and
education are explored in depth.

Prerequisite(s): None. (Summer or 3-0; 3-0)

LING 268 Introduction to TESOL (3
sem. hrs.)
This introductory course investigates the English
language itself (what we teach), the various ELT
methodologies and classroom techniques (how we
teach), and the participants in the teaching/
learning process (the who of ELT).

Cross-listed: EDUC 268.
Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0; 3-0)

LING 301 TESOL Volunteer
Practicum (1 sem. hr.)
This semester of classroom experience provides
opportunities for students to link their TESOL
courses to school settings. Students volunteer for
25 hours in an approved an English language
learning (ESL/EFL/ELL) program, interacting
with students and teachers, and carrying out
activities that prepare them for the 400-level
TESOL courses.

Prerequisite(s): LING/EDUC 268.

LING 302 Cross-cultural
Communication (3 sem. hrs.)
This course is about the nature of cross-cultural
interaction. Cultural concepts and contexts are
explored through taxonomies, theories, and
comparative analysis. Through in-class and out-of-
class activities, students become self-aware and
other-aware. Students also experiment with
cultural behaviours and cultural change, aiming to
increase both explanatory and predictive cultural
knowledge, and enhance behavioural
competencies.

Cross-listed: ANTH 302/MCOM 372.
Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0; 3-0)

LING 304 Tutoring English Language
Learners (2 sem. hrs.)
This course highlights the unique aspects of
tutoring English language learners. Students use
needs-assessments to design individualized
programs and lessons, as well as explore the
business side of tutoring.

Prerequisite(s): LING/EDUC 268. (2-0; 2-0)

LING 305 The Grammar of English for
TESOL (3 sem. hrs.)
This course examines the structure, function, and
usage of English grammar within the context of
language teaching.

Cross-listed: ENGL 305.
Prerequisite(s): LING/EDUC 268. (3-0; 3-0)

LING 306 The Sound System of
English (3 sem. hrs.)
In this course, students explore the sounds of
English, transcribing them with phonetic symbols,
and discover how these sounds function within
English to encode meaning. These findings are
then applied to assist language learners with their
pronunciation.

NB: Students may not take both LING/EDUC
306 and 310. Linguistics majors should take LING
310 and 330 rather than LING 306.
Prerequisite(s): LING 268. (3-0; 3-0)

LING 307 The Lexical System of
English (1 sem. hr.)
This course explores how words are formed
(morphology) and used to create meaning and
identifies common problems students encounter
with vocabulary development in order to provide
practical application for the classroom context.



                                               265
Prerequisite(s): LING/EDUC 268.

LING 308 Introduction to Canadian
Language Benchmarks (1 sem. hr.)
This course introduces the Canadian Language
Benchmarks (CLBs) and their application to
language assessment and lesson planning.

NB: This course is offered as an online course.
Prerequisite(s): LING/EDUC 268.

LING 309 Disabilities and Learning
English (1 sem. hr.)
The study of how to teach English language
learners (ELLs) with diverse learning needs,
developing the skills of identification, assessment,
and accommodation of ELLs with differing
learning abilities. Students discover how to apply
the Universal Design for Learning (UDL) as a
practical means to encourage inclusion for all
students.

Prerequisite(s): LING/EDUC 268.

LING 310 Articulatory Phonetics (3
sem. hrs.)
Theoretical and practical introduction to the broad
range of human speech sounds including tone,
intonation, stress, and duration; extensive drill in
producing and recognizing these sounds and
recording them with phonetic symbols; and
practice in recording and reproducing the sounds
of selected languages.

NB: Students may not take both LING 306 and
310.
Prerequisite(s): None. (Summer or 3-0; 3-0)

LING 312 Testing in TESOL (1 sem.
hr.)
Students are introduced to various methods of
testing in TESOL for all four skill areas: reading,
writing, listening, and speaking. Based on this
knowledge, students create a variety of test
materials for English language learners.

Prerequisite(s): LING/EDUC 268 or
instructor’s consent. (1-0; 1-0)
LING 313 Teaching English
Pronunciation (1 sem. hr.)
An exploration of principles and resources for the
teaching of pronunciation and application of these
to the language learning classroom.

Prerequisite(s): LING/EDUC 268, and LING
306 or 310. (1-0; 1-0)

LING 314 Teaching Beginners ESL (1
sem. hr.)
Practical demonstrations of various methods for
teaching beginning students with an emphasis on
communicative theory and activities. Resource
materials appropriate for classroom activities.

Prerequisite(s): LING/EDUC 268 or
instructor’s consent. (1-0; 1-0)

LING 315 Computer Assisted
Language Learning in TESOL (1 sem.
hr.)
An exploration of the history and theory
underlying computer assisted ESL instruction, as
well as the evaluation of online resources and the
application of new technologies to both individual
and classroom learning.

NB: This course is offered as an online course.
Prerequisite(s): LING/EDUC 268. (1-0; 1-0)

LING 316 Classroom Management in
TESOL (1 sem. hr.)
Students explore principles of classroom
management, especially as they apply to TESOL.
They become familiar with current sources of
information on classroom management, and begin
to develop a personal classroom management
system that is appropriate to the varied TESOL
audiences.

Prerequisite(s): LING/EDUC 268. (1-0; 1-0)

LING 317 Materials Creation and
Evaluation in TESOL (1 sem. hr.)
This course highlights the foundational principles
of materials design and evaluation in English-
language teaching. Students evaluate published
and teacher-made materials, and apply the



                                               266
principles to their own created materials in a
practical workshop setting.

Prerequisite(s): LING/EDUC 268. (1-0; 1-0)

LING 318 Using Drama in TESOL (1
sem. hr.)
This hands-on course provides an introduction to
using drama techniques in TESOL. Students
critically examine and reflect on how drama
activities can be used to contribute to the TESOL
classroom.

Prerequisite(s): LING/EDUC 268. (1-0; 1-0)

LING 319 Issues in TESOL and
Missions (1 sem. hr.)
This course examines the role English language
teaching has played within the modern foreign
missions movement. Criticisms of this approach
are examined, issues clarified, assumptions
articulated, and principles of a biblical, ethical
approach are suggested.

Prerequisite(s): LING/EDUC 268. (1-0; 1-0)

LING 330 Phonological Analysis (3
sem. hrs.)
The study of sound systems of human language,
including initial principles of phonological
analysis. Application of these principles to a wide
range of natural language data.

Co-requisite(s): LING 310. (Summer; 3-1; 3-1)

LING 360 Morphosyntax I (3 sem.
hrs.)
Theories of grammar and principles of language
analysis. Topics include: morphology, syntax,
stems, words, phrases, sentences, and categories
of meaning. Problem solving with data from a
variety of languages is a major part of the course.

Co-requisite(s): LING 310. (Summer; 3-1; 0-0)

LING 371 Training Across Cultures (3
sem. hrs.)
This course provides linguists, translators, and
literacy trainers with principles of adult learning to
increase their knowledge, skills and attitudes as
effective trainers of adults in cross-cultural
settings. Students will interact with literature in
adult education; describe how these principles
might apply cross-culturally; practice teaching
using these methods; then analyze and compare
approaches used in other cultures with practical
application to training across cultures. While the
focus is for training linguists, the principles can be
applied to training adults in a wide variety of
training situations.

Prerequisite(s): None. (3, 0)

LING 399 Internship in Field
Linguistics (3 sem. hrs.)
The linguistics practicum course is designed to
give students a short-term practical experience in a
language development program. Students work
with a faculty member at TWU and a mentor on
location to develop their ability as field linguists
through making a contribution to language
development work. The location, length of
assignment, and work commitments are
determined by the faculty member in consultation
with the student and field mentor. 120 hours of
work are required.

Prerequisite(s): 15 semester hours of linguistics.
LING 210, 310, 330, 360. LING 480 and 481 also
recommended. Permission from Program Chair.

LING 401 TESOL Teaching
Practicum (1 sem. hr.)
A teaching practicum. Students spend 25 hours in
an approved English language learning
(ESL/EFL/ELL) program: 15 hours observation
and assisting, 10 hours teaching. Students apply
TESOL principles and skills to actual practice in
the classroom.

NB: Pass/Fail course.
Prerequisite(s): LING 301 and 410 or 420

LING 402 TESOL Teaching
Practicum II (1 sem. hr.)
A teaching practicum for students wishing to
apply for TESL Canada certification. Students
spend 25 hours in an approved ESL program: 15
hours of observation and assisting, 10 hours of
teaching. Students apply TESOL principles and
skills to actual practice in the classroom.


                                                  267
NB: Pass/Fail course.
Prerequisite(s): LING 401.

LING 410 Teaching Listening and
Speaking in TESOL (3 sem. hrs.)
This course helps students acquire the practical
knowledge and skills necessary to effectively teach
listening and speaking to English language
learners. The course provides an orientation to the
theoretical perspectives of teaching listening and
speaking, to a variety of classroom strategies and
assessment methods, and to printed and online
resources.

Prerequisite(s): LING 268, 301, 305, and either
306 or 310.

LING 420 Teaching Reading and
Writing in TESOL (3 sem. hrs.)
This course is designed to help students acquire
the practical knowledge and skills to effectively
teach reading and writing to English language
learners. The course provides an orientation to the
theoretical perspectives of teaching reading and
writing, to a variety of classroom strategies and
assessment methods, and to printed and online
resources.

Prerequisite(s): LING 268, 301, and 305. (3-0; 3-
0)

LING 460 Morphosyntax II (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course explores the rich variety of
morphological and syntactic constructions and
processes found in human language, deepening
the students’ understanding of morphosyntactic
phenomena from a typological perspective. The
topics are examined within the framework of a
current theory of syntax.

Prerequisite(s): LING 210, 310, 330, 360.
(summer, 3-0; 0-0)

LING 466 Principles of Sociolinguistic
Survey (3 sem. hrs.)
This course introduces the students to the
rudiments of linguistic and sociolinguistic survey.
The focus is on purpose-driven language survey
design and appropriate subsequent reporting of
the findings. Consideration is given to current
issues in social science research such as the ethics
of sampling, and statistical significance of sample
populations.

Co-requisite(s): LING 210. (summer, 0-0; 0-0).)

LING 470 Language and Culture
Acquisition (3 sem. hrs.)
This course introduces students to theories of
second language and second culture acquisition.
Students develop and evaluate self-directed
strategies based on personal learning styles.
Practical experience in the above topics is gained
by working with a speaker of a non-Indo-
European language.

NB: LING 480 is recommended in same
semester.
Cross-listed: ANTH 470.
Prerequisite(s): LING 210, 310, 330, 360. (3-2;
0-0)

LING 471 First Language Acquisition
(3 sem. hrs.)
Covers typical first language acquisition in
children. Major topics include phonology,
vocabulary, grammar, syntax, pragmatics, as well
as literacy development. Application to fields of
speech-language pathology and audiology are
developed through sections on language
impairment and hearing loss.

NB: Offered in odd-numbered years.
Prerequisite(s): LING 310, 330 and 360. (0-0; 3-
0)

LING 475 Scripture Engagement (3
sem. hrs.)
This course focuses on developing appropriate
materials and activities that enhance a
community’s engagement with Scripture. Students
learn how to research worldview, work with local
artists and teachers, and partner with local leaders
in this process.

Prerequisite(s): None. (Summer, 0-0; 0-0).)

LING 476 Acoustic Phonetics (3 sem.
hrs.)


                                                 268
This course introduces students to fundamental
principles of acoustics that are relevant to the
study of human speech sounds. Students gain a
basic understanding of the properties of speech
sound waves and learn to investigate these
properties instrumentally using acoustic analysis
software. Students gain extensive practice
interpreting acoustic displays such as waveform
graphs, fundamental frequency graphs, and
spectrograms. A major focus of the course is the
effective use of these displays as an aid to
correctly transcribing speech sounds and
understanding their phonetic properties in the
context of descriptive phonetic and/or
phonological fieldwork. Significant attention is
also given to the complex interrelationships
among acoustic, articulatory, and perceptual
correlates of speech sounds.

Prerequisite(s): LING 310. (3-0; 0-0)

LING 480 Field Methods: Data
Management and Analysis (3 sem.
hrs.)
Practical methodology for managing, analyzing,
and describing language data. Working with a
native speaker of a non-Indo-European language,
students gain experience in the ethics of fieldwork,
techniques of data collection and recording,
analysis using the scientific method, and the use of
linguistic software.

NB: LING 470 is recommended in same
semester.
Prerequisite(s): LING 310, 330, 360.

LING 481 Anthropological Linguistics:
Ethnography (3 sem. hrs.)
This course introduces crucial concepts in
anthropology and ethnography to linguists. It
focuses on cross-cultural communication with an
emphasis on participant observation as an
effective methodology for such research. Students
collect and analyze data related to topics such as
oral traditions, kinship, and social structure. They
are introduced to various tools for ethno-semantic
analysis, including analysis of cultural themes and
worldview, semantic domain analysis, and
taxonomic analysis.
Prerequisite(s): LING 210, or equivalent
introduction to sociolinguistics, or instructor’s
consent. (Summer or 3-0; 3-0)

LING 482 Issues in Community
Literacy (3 sem. hrs.)
This course focuses on issues relating to literacy
programs in a community of speakers of a
minority language. It deals with various program
issues, including: bridging the gap to oral
communities and introducing change in a
community, motivation and mobilization,
capacity-building and sustainability, training and
evaluation, the challenges of working in
multilingual societies and with those in stressed
situations, and using participatory approaches in
all aspects of the program.

Prerequisite(s): LING 484. (0-0; 3-0)

LING 483 Language Program Design
and Management (3 sem. hrs.)
This course investigates the sociolinguistic and
background factors upon which a language
development program for speakers of vernacular
languages may be based. Students learn to work
with local people and agencies in designing and
implementing a program to effectively meet the
needs of specific language groups.

Prerequisite(s): LING 210 or instructor’s
consent. (Summer 3-0; 3-0)

LING 484 Principles of Literacy (3
sem. hrs.)
As an introductory course in principles for literacy
work in ethnolinguistic minority groups, this
course includes an introduction to what a literacy
program involves, including orthography design,
pre- and post- literacy considerations, learning and
reading theory, and instructional methodologies.
Requires a background knowledge of phonology.

Prerequisite(s): LING 310, 330. (summer or 3-0;
0-0)

LING 485 Principles of Translation (3
sem. hrs.)
This course covers the process of translating from
a source language to a target language. Students



                                                    269
will develop skill in understanding a message as
originally communicated in one language and
cultural setting and in communicating essentially
that message in a very different language and
culture. Discussion includes: source language,
target language, and cross-language transfer, with
particular attention to the translation of Scripture.

Prerequisite(s): LING 470, 480, 493. (0-0; 3-0)

LING 486 Advanced Phonological
Analysis (3 sem. hrs.)
This course introduces students to advanced
concepts of phonological theory. Employing the
theoretical models they are learning, students
develop a clearer understanding of the typological
behavior of phonological systems by analyzing
data from a variety of languages.

Prerequisite(s): LING 310, 330; minimum grade
of B-. (0-0; 3-0)

LING 487 Lexicography (3 sem. hrs.)
Provides a theoretical and practical basis for
analyzing the semantics of the lexicon, managing a
lexical database, and producing dictionaries for a
variety of audiences including the local
community, translators, and linguists.

Prerequisite(s): LING 480.

LING 488 Literacy Materials
Development (3 sem. hrs.)
This course teaches students how to prepare basic
pedagogical materials and early readers in
languages that may not have a long-written
tradition. Special emphasis is given to teaching
techniques for involving the local language
community in the production of these materials.

Prerequisite(s): LING 484. (0-0; 3-0)

LING 490 Special Topics in
Linguistics (3 sem. hrs.)
An examination of special topics or issues in
linguistics that are not covered in depth in other
courses.

NB: Offered on a case-by-case basis as needed.
See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): LING 310, 330, 360, or
equivalent courses, third year standing, and
instructor’s consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

LING 491 Discourse Analysis (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course focuses on the question of how
speakers of a given language effectively
accomplish their communicative goals through the
strategic use and shaping of language in both
written and oral discourse. Students learn to
identify different discourse genres, to chart texts
for analysis, to discern hierarchical units within the
macrostructure of a text, and to describe features
of cohesion and participant reference, as well as
identifying strategies in language for establishing
the relative prominence of various streams of
information. Special attention is paid to the
interaction between alternate syntactic forms and
their varying pragmatic functions in context.

Prerequisite(s): LING 480 or equivalent courses,
third year standing and instructor’s consent. (3-0;
0-0)

LING 493 Semantics and Pragmatics
(3 sem. hrs.)
This course provides students with the theoretical
tools with which to study meaning at the word
and sentence levels, and to explain how people
interpret utterances in context. Students will study
various models of semantics and pragmatics, and
learn how to apply different approaches to the
study of meaning in natural language.

Prerequisite(s): LING 360. (3-0; 3-0)

LING 499 Philosophical Perspectives
in Linguistics (3 sem. hrs.)
This course examines the philosophical bases of
human language and communication, with special
attention to issues relating to semantics, discourse,
lexicon, metaphor, and translation, etc.; all the
areas that deal with meaning creation. There is a
critical review of some major schools of thought
within philosophy of language and hermeneutics.
These are examined in light of current insights in
text linguistics, cognitive linguistics, and
integrational linguistics.




                                                  270
Prerequisite(s): LING 310, 330, and 360. (3-0; 0-
0)



Linguistics,
Graduate Courses
NB: The following courses are part of the Linguistics
Graduate Program. For further information about courses
see the School of Graduate Studies section or contact the
MA LING Graduate Program director.

LING 511 TESOL Methodology (3
sem. hrs.)
This course offers an overview of teaching
strategies and methodology in TESOL. The focus
is on teacher development, utilizing Christian
values, and developing leadership skills in the
field.

LING 512 Second Language
Acquisition (3 sem. hrs.)
Second language learning and acquisition is an
intricate process that involves the dynamic
interaction of individual and social variables. This
survey course considers a wide range of theories,
models, and research that have been proposed to
account for this process. Participants are guided to
evaluate and consider the implications of different
perspectives for second language teaching in a
variety of contexts.

LING 513 Sociolinguistics (3 sem. hrs.)
The course examines language within its social
context through dealing with topics such as dialect
and language definition, the role of the mother
tongue in defining self-identity, language attitudes,
the maintenance, loss, shift or spread of language
domains, multilingualism, and sociolinguistic
survey. Also, a means of helping students develop
realistic expectations and appropriate approaches
for linguistic issues in cross-cultural fieldwork,
attention is given to an overview of language study
within a worldview context, to sociolinguistic
factors affecting literacy programs, and to
methods of second language acquisition.
LING 514 Materials Evaluation and
Design (3 sem. hrs.)
Students are exposed to a variety of ESL
materials, and learn how to evaluate
appropriateness and quality prior to
implementation. Issues of audience need,
philosophy, and application are discussed.
Extension of published materials are examined.

LING 517 Evaluation and
Measurement in TESOL (3 sem. hrs.)
Students examine and evaluate various theories of
testing in ESL. Methods of testing grammar,
speaking, listening, reading, and writing skills are
introduced; criteria for ensuring reliability and
validity are explained and then used by students.

LING 518 Curriculum and Program
Design (3 sem. hrs.)
This course is designed to enable students to
design appropriate programs and course sets for
ES/FL programs. In addition to examining
general English programs, the course focuses on
English for Specific Purposes and, in particular,
needs analyses and custom course design.

LING 531 Issues in Applied
Linguistics (1 sem. hr.)
This course introduces students to selected issues
of contemporary significance in several areas in
applied linguistics and second-language teaching.
Students are expected to identify and develop
knowledge in an area of their own personal
interest in applied linguistics and second-language
teaching.

LING 532 Teaching Young Children (1
sem. hr.)
Students examine the issues of teaching young
children and develop strategies for teaching them.

LING 533 Teaching English Grammar
(1 sem. hr.)
The course examines strategies for grammar
instruction in ESOL. As well as evaluating
techniques for teaching grammar, it includes
discussion of the appropriate timing of grammar
instruction within a curriculum, a syllabus, and
student level.



                                                 271
LING 534 Computer Assisted
Language Learning (1 sem. hr.)
The various theories underlying computer assisted
ESOL instruction are examined, and students find
and evaluate net based ESOL learning tools.
Evaluation of the appropriateness of computer
assisted learning software to various groups,
language abilities, and levels of English ability are
discussed. Application of CML to ESL is
examined.

Cross-listed: LING 315.

LING 535 Teaching Beginners ESL (1
sem. hr.)
Practical demonstrations of various methods for
teaching beginning students with an emphasis on
communicative theory and activities. Resource
materials appropriate for classroom activities.

Cross-listed: LING 314.

LING 536 Issues in TESOL and
Missions (1 sem. hr.)
This course focuses on how teaching English as a
second or foreign language can be integrated with
the task of world missions. Issues like ethics and
professionalism, assumptions about world
missions, and implications for strategy are
discussed.

Cross-listed: LING 319.

LING 540 Diversity in Language
Education (3 sem. hr.)
This course teaches students to examine culture,
acculturation, gender, and personal identity issues
in the teaching of English. The approach to these
issues is generally informed by critical applied
linguistics, phenomenology, and integrationist
linguistics.

LING 555 Historical and Comparative
Linguistics (3 sem. hrs.)
This course introduces students to language
change. It considers how and why languages
change and the role of language contact. It also
presents different theories and methodologies
useful for historical and comparative linguistic
investigation. Students will investigate a number
of related existing languages from language
families around the world, and seek to reconstruct
substantial elements of earlier proto-language
stages in terms of phonology, morphology,
lexicon, and historical dialectology. (3-0; 0-0)

LING 560 Morphosyntax II (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course explores the rich variety of
morphological and syntactic constructions and
processes found in human language, deepening
the students’ understanding of morphosyntactic
phenomena from a typological perspective. The
topics are examined within the framework of a
current theory of syntax.

NB: Offered in summer in even numbered years.
(3-0; 0-0)

LING 566 Principles of Sociolinguistic
Survey (3 sem. hrs.)
This course introduces the students to the
rudiments of linguistic and sociolinguistic survey.
The focus is on purpose-driven language survey
design and appropriate subsequent reporting of
the findings. Consideration is given to current
issues in social science research such as the ethics
of sampling, and statistical significance of sample
populations.

Co-requisite(s): LING 210, or equivalent
introduction to sociolinguistics. (Summer, 0-0; 0-
0).

LING 570 Language and Culture
Acquisition: Theory and Praxis (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course introduces students to theories of
second language and second culture acquisition.
Students develop and evaluate self-directed
strategies based on personal learning styles.
Practical experience in the above topics is gained
by working with a speaker of a non-Indo-
European language. (3-0; 0-0)

NB: LING 580 is recommended in the same
semester.

LING 576 Acoustic Phonetics (3 sem.
hrs.)


                                                 272
This course introduces students to fundamental
principles of acoustics that are relevant to the
study of human speech sounds. Students gain a
basic understanding of properties of speech sound
waves and learn to investigate these properties
instrumentally using acoustic analysis software.
Students gain extensive practice interpreting
acoustic displays such as waveform graphs,
fundamental frequency graphs, and spectrograms.
A major focus of the course is the effective use of
these displays as an aid to correctly transcribing
speech sounds and understanding their phonetic
properties in the context of descriptive phonetic
and/or phonological fieldwork. Significant
attention is also given to the complex
interrelationships among acoustic, articulatory,
and perceptual correlates of speech sounds. (3-0;
0-0)

LING 580 Field Method: Data
Management and Analysis (3 sem.
hrs.)
Practical methodology for managing, analyzing,
and describing language data. Working with a
native speaker of a non-Indo-European language,
students gain experience in the ethics of fieldwork,
techniques of data collection and recording,
analysis using the scientific method, and the use of
linguistic software.

NB: LING 570 is recommended in the same
semester. (3-1; 3-1)

LING 581 Anthropological Linguistics:
Ethnography (3 sem. hrs.)
This course introduces crucial concepts in
anthropology and ethnography to linguists. It
focuses on cross-cultural communication with an
emphasis on participant observation as an
effective methodology for such research. Students
collect and analyze data related to topics such as
oral traditions, kinship, and social structure. They
are introduced to various tools for ethno-semantic
analysis, including analysis of cultural themes and
worldview, semantic domain analysis, and
taxonomic analysis.

Prerequisite(s): LING 210, or equivalent
introduction to sociolinguistics. (Summer or 3-0;
3-0)
LING 582 Issues in Community
Literacy (3 sem. hrs.)
The issues in community literacy work that are
covered in this course include various program
issues such as introducing literacy in an oral
community, motivation for literacy, capacity-
building and sustainability, training of personnel
and evaluation of the program, and using
participatory approaches in all aspects of the
program.

Prerequisite(s): LING 584. (0-0; 3-0)

LING 583 Language Programs Design
and Management (3 sem. hrs.)
This course investigates the sociolinguistic and
background factors upon which a language
development program for speakers of vernacular
languages may be based. Students learn to work
with local people and agencies in designing and
implementing a program to effectively meet the
needs of specific language groups.

Prerequisite(s): LING 210, or equivalent
introduction to sociolinguistics. (Summer; 3-0;
 3-0)

LING 584 Principles of Literacy (3
sem. hrs.)
This course covers methods used in the
introduction of literacy to ethno-linguistic
minority groups. It includes orthography design,
consideration of socio-historical issues, strategies
for literacy programs, stimulation of local
authorship, reading theory, and instructional
methodologies. (Summer, 3-0, 0-0)

LING 585 Principles of Translation (3
sem. hrs.)
This course covers the process of translating from
a source language to a target language. Students
will develop skill in understanding a message as
originally communicated in one language and
cultural setting, and in communicating essentially
that message in a very different language and
culture. Discussion includes: source language,
target language, and cross-language transfer, with
particular attention to the translation of Scripture.




                                                  273
Prerequisite(s): LING 570, 580, 593. (summer or
0-0; 3-0)

LING 586 Advanced Phonological
Analysis (3 sem. hrs.)
This course introduces students to advanced
concepts of phonological theory. Employing the
theoretical models they are learning, students
develop a clearer understanding of the typological
behavior of phonological systems by analyzing
data from a variety of languages. (0-0; 3-0)

LING 587 Lexicography (3 sem. hrs.)
Provides a theoretical and practical basis for
analyzing the semantics of the lexicon, managing a
lexical database, and producing dictionaries for a
variety of audiences including the local
community, translators, and linguists.

Prerequisite(s): LING 580. (0-0; 3-0)

LING 588 Literacy Materials
Development (3 sem. hrs.)
This course teaches students how to prepare basic
pedagogical materials and early readers in
languages that may not have a long-written
tradition. Special emphasis is given to teaching
techniques for involving the local language
community in the production of these materials.

Prerequisite(s): LING 584. (0-0; 3-0)

LING 593 Semantics and Pragmatics
(3 sem. hrs.)
This course provides students with the theoretical
tools with which to study meaning at the word
and sentence levels, and to explain how people
interpret utterances in context. Students will study
various models of semantics and pragmatics, and
learn how to apply different approaches to the
study of meaning in natural language. (3-0; 3-0)

LING 599 Philosophical Perspectives
in Linguistics (3 sem. hrs.)
This course examines the philosophical basis of
human language and communication, with special
attention to issues relating to semantics, discourse,
lexicon, metaphor, and translation — all the areas
that deal with meaning creation. There is a critical
review of some major schools of thought within
philosophy of language and hermeneutics. These
are examined in light of current insights in text
linguistics, cognitive linguistics, and integrational
linguistics. (3-0; 0-0)

LING 611 Applied Phonology for
TESOL (3 sem. hrs.)
This course examines a wide range of more
advanced applications for phonological and
phonetic frameworks. In addition to methods for
teaching and integrating pronunciation in language
teaching for several learner populations, from
basic articulation training to discourse-level
pronunciation instruction, students study relevant
techniques from a number of academic disciplines
which deal with relationships between speech,
voice, body movement, and emotion.

LING 612 Research Methods in
Applied Linguistics (3 sem. hrs.)
This course develops student understanding of
quantitative and qualitative research methods and
familiarize them with research issues and statistics
related to applied linguistics. In addition, students
are guided through the methodology of action
research and the process of topic choice for the
major project (to be done in the internship).

LING 613 Integrating the Four Skills
(3 sem. hrs.)
In this course students survey current methods
and models for integrating the teaching of
speaking, listening, reading, and writing to one
specific learner population. (This population
should be the type of learner that students have
worked with or hope to work with.)

LING 624 Leadership in TESOL (3
sem. hrs.)
This course examines leadership from several
perspectives in the field of TESOL, including
program management, professional organizations,
and teacher training.

LING 630 English for Academic
Purposes (3 sem. hrs.)
This course surveys methods for preparing ESL
students to function in academic English and
classrooms where English is the language of



                                                   274
instruction, especially in EFL (English as a foreign
language) settings.

LING 632 Workplace and Vocational
English (3 sem. hrs.)
Students examine issues in teaching English for
specific purposes in the context of business and
workplace English. They study the full range of
EBP program implementation, from the principles
of needs analysis and curricular design and
implementation to developing program proposals
for business clientele.

LING 633 Readings in Teacher
Training (1 sem. hr.)
In this course, students do selected readings in the
methodology of ESL teacher training, tailored to
their field of specialization.

LING 640 Internship and Research
Project (4 sem. hrs.)
A 100-hour teaching internship, including design
of an action research project. With approval,
students may elect to do the TESL Canada Level-
3 Certificate option or the International Internship
option, which is typically conducted outside of
Canada.

LING 641 eMentor Consultation (2
sem. hrs.)
Students work with an eMentor, an accomplished
professional in the field of ESL/EFL. Each
eConsultation focuses on a different aspect of the
student’s internship, depending on the nature of
the class setting of the internship. Likewise,
eMentors are chosen based on the specialization
of the student.

LING 642 ePortfolio (1 sem. hr.)
Students complete an initial ePortfolio based on
their course work in the MA TESOL program and
their accumulated professional experience thus far.

LING 650 Survey of Linguistic
Theories (3 sem. hrs.)
This course introduces students to a wide range of
linguistic theories. Students read and discuss
original works written from various perspectives
and gain in the process a clearer appreciation for
the range of views that exist concerning the nature
of human language and its syntactic, semantic,
phonological, and discourse properties.

Prerequisite(s): LING 560. (0-0; 3-0)

LING 660 Topics in Morphology &
Syntax (3 sem. hrs.)
An article-based course providing an in-depth
exploration of current issues in the linguistic
subfields of Morphology and Syntax. The types of
topics addressed include: wordhood, clitics,
grammatical relations, voice, valence, transitivity,
noun incorporation, control constructions, raising,
reflexivity & reciprocalization, complementation,
evidentiality, secondary predication, and iconicity
& economy. Students apply the acquired
knowledge in producing a major paper.

Prerequisite(s): LING 560. (3-0; 3-0)

LING 680 Advanced Field Methods (3
sem. hrs.)
In this course, students transcribe, organize, and
analyze language data and prepare a written
description of phonological, morphosyntactic, or
discourse features of the language. The course
focuses on applying effective fieldwork
methodologies.

Prerequisite(s): LING 560, 580, 586. (3-0; 0-0)

LING 685 Academic Writing in
Linguistics (3 sem. hrs.)
This course develops skills in academic writing for
linguistics, including articles, abstracts, theses,
books, etc.

Prerequisite(s): LING 680. (0-0; 3-0)
LING 688 Tone Analysis (3 sem. hrs.)
This course introduces students to a methodology
of tone analysis, incorporating the insights of
current theoretical approaches. Students also learn
to apply insights from the analysis of a tone
system to developing practical orthographies. (0-0;
3-0)

LING 691 Discourse Analysis (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course focuses on the question of how
speakers of a given language effectively



                                                 275
accomplish their communicative goals through the
strategic use and shaping of language in both
written and oral discourse. Students learn to
identify different discourse genres, to chart texts
for analysis, to discern hierarchical units within the
macrostructure of a text, and to describe features
of cohesion and participant reference, as well as
identifying strategies in language for establishing
the relative prominence of various streams of
information. Special attention is paid to the
interaction between alternate syntactic forms and
their varying pragmatic functions in context.

Prerequisite(s): LING 580. (3-0; 3-0)

LING 695 Topics in Linguistics (3
sem. hrs.)
An examination of special topics or issues in
linguistics that are not covered in depth in other
courses. (3-0; 3-0)

LING 696 Comprehensive exam (0
sem. hrs.)
Every non-thesis student in the MA Linguistics
program is required to write a comprehensive
exam in the last semester of their program.
Contact the program director for details.

LING 697 Linguistics Thesis I (3 sem.
hrs.)
The student, in frequent consultation with his/her
advisor, selects a thesis topic and writes a thesis
proposal. Once the proposal has been accepted by
the student’s thesis advisory committee, he/she
begins writing the thesis. There are no formal
classes.

Co-requisite(s): LING 680. (3-0; 3-0)
LING 698 Linguistics Thesis II (3
sem. hrs.)
The student, in consultation with his/her advisor,
works towards completion of the thesis. Upon
completion, the thesis must be defended orally
before an examining committee. There are no
formal classes.

Prerequisite(s): LING 697. (3-0; 3-0)

LING 699 Linguistics Continuing
Registration (0 sem. hrs.)
Continuing Registration maintains the student’s
enrolment in the program and is taken only when
all required courses are complete and only as a
continuation of an incomplete thesis. Although no
credit is given for it, a fee is charged for each
semester of enrolment.

Prerequisite(s): LING 698. (Summer 3-0)



Mathematics
MATH 101 Mathematics for Business
(3 sem. hrs.)
Basic concepts in mathematics with applications in
business. Topics include elementary counting and
probability, variables, equations and functions,
interest rates, annuities, and loan calculations. The
course is aimed at business students and serves to
enhance a student’s understanding of mathematics
and its usefulness in a business environment.

Prerequisite(s): At least a C in BC Principles of
Mathematics 11, Foundations of Math 11, Pre-
Calculus 11 or equivalent. (3-0 or 3-0)

MATH 102 Introduction to Probability
and Statistics (3 sem. hrs.)
Students will explore probability theory,
descriptive and inferential statistics at an
introductory level; applications are taken from a
wide range of disciplines. Topics include
descriptive analysis, scientific visualization, sets,
permutations and combinations, probability,
discrete and continuous distributions (e.g.,
binomial, normal, t-), confidence intervals and
hypothesis testing, correlation, and linear
regression. Not for credit towards a major,
concentration, or minor in Mathematics.

NB: Credit is granted for only one of MATH 102
or 108.
Cross-listed: STAT 102.
Prerequisite(s): At least a C in BC Principles of
Mathematics 11, Foundations of Math 11, Pre-
Calculus 11 or equivalent. (3-0; 3-0)

MATH 105 Pre-Calculus Mathematics
(3 sem. hrs.)


                                                    276
An introduction to the tools essential for the study
of calculus. Topics include algebra, trigonometry,
exponents, logarithms, functions, graphs, conics,
and plane analytic geometry. This course is taken
by Science majors whose screening test during
registration indicates they are not ready to take
MATH 123.

Prerequisite(s): At least a B in BC Principles of
Mathematics 11, Foundations of Math 11, Pre-
Calculus 11 or equivalent. (4-0; 0, 0)

MATH 108 Statistics for Health Care
Students (3 sem. hrs.)
Students specializing in the field of nursing will
explore applied statistics at an introductory level.
The focus is on developing the conceptual aspects
of the subject rather than the mathematical
foundations and assumes no prerequisite except
elementary algebra. Topics include descriptive
statistics, probability, the normal, t-, chi-square
and F-distributions, confidence intervals,
hypothesis testing, correlation, and regression.
Applications are directed towards health and
biological studies.

NB: Credit may be received for only one of
MATH 102 or 108. Only open to nursing
students.
Cross-listed: STAT 108.
Prerequisite(s): At least a C in BC Principles of
Mathematics 11, Foundations of Math 11, Pre-
Calculus 11 or equivalent. (3-0 or 3-0)

MATH 123 Calculus I (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to the basic elements of calculus
and its applications to modeling solutions to
quantitative and computational problems
encountered in mathematics and science.
Prerequisite(s): At least a B in BC Principles of
Mathematics 12, or Pre-Calculus 12 or equivalent,
or MATH 105. (4-0-1; 4-0-1)

MATH 124 Calculus II (3 sem. hrs.)
Transcendental functions, integration techniques,
polar co-ordinates, sequences, series, and Taylor
series.

Prerequisite(s): MATH 123. (0-0-0; 4-0-1)
MATH 150 Introduction to Discrete
Math (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to those branches of pure
mathematics which are most commonly used in
the study of Computing Science and/or have
other practical applications. Topics include logic,
proofs, switching circuits, set theory, induction,
functions, languages, finite automata,
combinatorics, and algebraic structures.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: CMPT 150.
Prerequisite(s): BC high school Mathematics 12,
or Pre-Calculus 12, or MATH 105, or the
equivalent. (3-1-0; 0-0-0)

MATH 190 Mathematics for
Elementary Teachers (3 sem. hrs.)
Mathematical concepts and topics that undergird
the elementary school mathematics curriculum.
Topics include principles and applications of
number systems, sets, equations, linear
programming, geometry, and mathematical proof
within a historical and societal context. It may not
be used to meet a mathematics requirement in any
other program. Students are responsible for
checking the mathematics requirements of the
school at which they intend to take their
professional year, as they may be different from
those required to obtain a teaching certificate.

NB: Credit is granted for only one of MATH 101,
102, 108, or 190. Open to declared Elementary
Education majors only.
Prerequisite(s): At least a C in BC Principles of
Mathematics 11, Foundations of Math 11, Pre-
Calculus 11 or equivalent. (4-0 or 4-0)

MATH 191 Mathematics, History &
Culture (3 sem. hrs.)
Investigates the history of some of the principal
mathematical societies, including ancient Egypt,
Babylon, and Greece; pre-modern Islamic
societies, India, and China; indigenous cultures;
and the modern west, providing context for
students’ performance of arithmetic, algebra, and
geometry. Students shall discover how
mathematics is shaped by, and itself shapes,
historical movements, philosophical positions, and
issues of faith



                                                 277
NB: Credit cannot be received for both MATH
190 and 191. This course cannot count towards a
MATH minor, concentration, major or CMPT
program.
Prerequisite(s): None.

MATH 223 Calculus III (3 sem. hrs.)
Multivariate calculus. Topics include vectors,
vector functions and derivatives; curves; partial
and directional derivatives; Lagrange multipliers;
double and triple integrals; spherical and
cylindrical co-ordinates; vector integrals, Green’s
Theorem, and surface integrals.

Prerequisite(s): MATH 124. (3-0; 0-0)

MATH 250 Linear Algebra (3 sem.
hrs.)
Systems of linear equations, matrices,
determinants, vector spaces, linear
transformations, eigenvalues and eigenvectors,
diagonalization applications, and linear
programming.

Prerequisite(s): MATH 123 or 150. (3-0 or 3-0)

MATH 310 Probability and Statistics (3
sem. hrs.)
A study of the fundamental principles of
mathematical statistics. Topics include probability
distributions and densities, expectation and
moment-generating functions, functions of
random variable, sampling distributions,
estimation, hypothesis testing, regression and
correlation, analysis of variance, nonparametric
tests.

NB: With the instructor’s permission, may be
taken concurrently with MATH 223. Not offered
every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: STAT 310.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 223. (3-0 or 3-0)

MATH 320 Complex Analysis (3 sem.
hrs.)
Functions of a complex variable, differentiation,
analytic and elementary functions, Cauchy’s
theorem and contour integration, Taylor and
Laurent series, residues and poles, and conformal
mapping. Emphasis is placed on physical
applications.
NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 223. (3-0 or 3-0)

MATH 321 Differential Equations (4
sem. hrs.)
First-order differential equations, linear
differential equations, Laplace transforms, systems
of differential equations, non-linear systems, series
solutions, introduction to partial differential
equations. Special emphasis is placed on
applications to physics and engineering.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: PHYS 321.
Co-requisite(s): MATH 223, 250. (4-0 or 4-0)

MATH 323 Analysis (4 sem. hrs.)
Sequences and induction; convergence of
sequences and series; limits, continuity, and
differentiability; Riemann integrals; sequences of
functions and an introduction to topology.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Co-requisite(s): MATH 223. (4-0 or 4-0)

MATH 330 Numerical Analysis (4
sem. hrs.)
This course covers numerical techniques for
solving problems in applied mathematics,
including error analysis, roots of equations,
interpolation, numerical differentiation and
integration, ordinary differential equations, matrix
methods and selected topics from among:
eigenvalues, approximation theory, non-linear
systems, boundary-value problems, numerical
solution of partial differential equations.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: CMPT 330.
Co-requisite(s): MATH 223, 250; CMPT 140 or
equivalent. (4-0 or 4-0)

MATH 333 Mathematics of Data
Science (3 sem. hrs.)
Foundational mathematical concepts
underpinning theoretical frameworks in data
science that depend on linear algebra and
multivariable calculus, with applications chosen
from machine learning, statistical inference, and
data assimilation. Possible topics include matrix
decompositions, gradient and multivariate chain


                                                 278
rule, Lagrange multipliers and constrained
optimization, maximum likelihood, and Bayesian
estimation.

Prerequisite(s): MATH 223, 250.

MATH 340 Discrete Structures and
Computing (3 sem. hrs.)
This is a second course in the topics of pure
mathematics, particularly those most commonly
used in the study of Computing Science and
related applications. It includes proof techniques,
models of computation, formal languages, analysis
of algorithms, trees and advanced general graph
theory with applications, finite state and automata
theory, encryption, and an elementary
introduction to mathematical structures such as
groups, rings, and fields.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: CMPT 340.
Prerequisite(s): CMPT 150 or MATH 150. (0-0;
3-0)

MATH 370 Geometry (3 sem. hrs.)
Finite geometries, transformations, Euclidean
geometry, constructions, inverse geometry,
projective geometry, non-Euclidean geometry.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 223, 250. (3-0 or 3-0)

MATH 390 Number Theory (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course includes a study of the ideas of
classical number theory, their historical
development, and modern applications. Topics
include divisibility and prime numbers, modular
arithmetic, primality tests, primitive roots,
quadratic reciprocity, Diophantine equations,
continued fractions, and applications such as
cryptography.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): Third year standing and an
understanding of mathematical proof techniques,
or instructor’s consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

MATH 400 Directed Studies in
Mathematics (3 sem. hrs.)
Students are required to produce an outline of the
topic to be studied in consultation with the
instructor. A course of reading and/or research is
pursued according to the approved outline.
Assessment may be via examination and/or a final
written report.

NB: This course, with the appropriate choice of
topics, can be used as a preparation for the senior
thesis (MATH 410).
Prerequisite(s): Advanced standing in
mathematics or instructor’s consent.

MATH 409 Thesis Preparation (1 sem.
hr.)
In consultation with a faculty advisor students
choose a mathematics topic for experiential
inquiry that will develop into a senior thesis
(MATH 410). Through student exploration and
advisor feedback a selection of relevant readings
and references are examined. A final written
report is presented consisting of a detailed thesis
proposal and a review of the literature.

Prerequisite(s): Advanced standing in
mathematics or instructor’s consent.

MATH 410 Senior Thesis (2 sem. hrs.)
Student-led inquiry into a chosen area of
mathematics with a final written report on the
research.

NB: Normally 2 sem. hrs. are assigned unless
arrangements are made with the department chair.
If 3 sem. hrs. are required, MATH 411 is taken.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 409, a related directed
study in preparation, or instructor’s consent.

MATH 411 Senior Thesis (3 sem. hrs.)
Research in a chosen area of mathematics with a
final written report.

Prerequisite(s): MATH 409, a related directed
study in preparation, or instructor’s consent.

MATH 420 Topics in Applied
Mathematics (3 sem. hrs.)
Possible topics could include mathematical models
of social and natural phenomena, linear
programming, applied mathematics in physics and
astronomy, etc.


                                                 279
NB: Not offered every year. See department
chair. Entry restricted to third- and fourth-year
students who meet the prerequisites for the topic
to be offered. (3-0 or 3-0)

MATH 450 Modern Algebra (3 sem.
hrs.)
Abstract algebra including group, field, and ring
theory; algebraic systems, polynomial theory, and
additional topics in modern and abstract algebra as
time permits.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 150 and 250, third year
standing or better (a 300 level Mathematics course
such as 323, 340, 370 or 390 is recommended),
and a very good understanding of mathematical
proof techniques, or instructor’s consent. (3-0; 3-
0)

STAT 102 Introduction to Probability
and Statistics (3 sem. hrs.)
Students will explore probability theory,
descriptive and inferential statistics at an
introductory level; applications are taken from a
wide range of disciplines. Topics include
descriptive analysis, scientific visualization, sets,
permutations and combinations, probability,
discrete and continuous distributions (e.g.,
binomial, normal, t-), confidence intervals and
hypothesis testing, correlation, and linear
regression. Not for credit towards a major,
concentration, or minor in Mathematics.

NB: Credit is granted for only one of STAT 102
or 108.
Cross-listed: MATH 102.
Prerequisite(s): At least a C in BC Principles of
Mathematics 11, Foundations of Math 11, Pre-
Calculus 11 or equivalent. (3-0; 3-0)

STAT 108 Statistics for Health Care
Students (3 sem. hrs.)
Students specializing in the field of nursing will
explore applied statistics at an introductory level.
The focus is on developing the conceptual aspects
of the subject rather than the mathematical
foundations and assumes no prerequisite except
elementary algebra. Topics include descriptive
statistics, probability, the normal, t-, chi-square
and F-distributions, confidence intervals,
hypothesis testing, correlation, and regression.
Applications are directed towards health and
biological studies.

NB: Credit may be received for only one of
STAT 102 or 108. Only open to nursing students.
Cross-listed: MATH 108.
Prerequisite(s): At least a C in BC Principles of
Mathematics 11, Foundations of Math 11, Pre-
Calculus 11 or equivalent. (3-0 or 3-0)

STAT 310 Probability and Statistics (3
sem. hrs.)
A study of the fundamental principles of
mathematical statistics. Topics include probability
distributions and densities, expectation and
moment-generating functions, functions of
random variable, sampling distributions,
estimation, hypothesis testing, regression and
correlation, analysis of variance, nonparametric
tests.

NB: With the instructor’s permission, may be
taken concurrently with MATH 223. Not offered
every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: STAT 310.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 223. (3-0 or 3-0)



Media and
Communication
MCOM 111 Introduction to Mass
Communication (3 sem. hrs.)
An investigation into the nature and impact of
mass media and popular culture. Students will
explore a wide range technological, historical,
economic, theological, and other social factors and
issues so they will be equipped to answer the
central question of the course: how can media
users faithfully and critically engage the popular
narratives and other media experiences of today’s
culture?

NB: Fulfills University core requirement for social
and global inquiry. Required of all media studies
stream majors in first year.
Prerequisite(s): None. (0-0; 3-0)



                                                   280
MCOM 140 Introduction to Game
Design (3 sem. hrs.)
An intelligent, playful course in which students
will apply the history, theory, and practice of game
design to the creation of games. While the material
of this course is relevant to video game design,
students will primarily focus on board and card
games.

Cross-listed: GAME 140.
Prerequisite(s): None.

MCOM 171 Introduction to
Communication (3 sem. hrs.)
This course is designed to introduce students to
key questions in the field of communication
studies regarding human interconnectedness.
Beginning with social scientific and humanistic
models of inquiry it proceeds to survey theories
and research, and requires students to investigate
questions and formulate answers to personal,
social, and global issues.

NB: Fulfills University core requirement for social
and global inquiry. Required of all media and
communication majors in first year.
Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0; 0-0)

MCOM 172 Introduction to
Interpersonal Communication (3 sem.
hrs.)
An introduction to basic self-awareness and
interpersonal communication skills. Students learn
about the nature of the communication process.
The emphasis is on developing and practising the
ability to communicate effectively with others. As
part of the course requirements, students are
expected to share personal (but not necessarily
private) experiences with others.

NB: Course taught at Catholic Pacific College, an
approved TWU learning centre.
Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0 or 3-0)

MCOM 190 Communication
Colloquium (0 sem. hrs.)
This course gathers the entire department together
on a weekly basis to talk about important issues
facing communication students and professionals,
and to help prepare students for finding and
building their careers after graduating, which is
accomplished by bringing in guest speakers from a
variety of professions. These sessions also give an
opportunity for students to consider the
integration of faith and career. Another goal is to
build connections and community within the
department and the School of the Arts, Media and
Culture.

NB: Required of all students majoring in media
and communication (not corporate
communication) every semester through the
duration of their program (eight times).
Prerequisite(s): None.

MCOM 191 Research and Writing in
Communication (3 sem. hrs.)
This writing-intensive course orients students to
the demands of academic research and writing
within the media and communication major. By
course completion, the diligent student should be
able to write lucid, academic, and researched prose
in the genres of cultural critique, scientific
reporting, and term papers. Central to the course
are the twin emphases of critical thinking
strategies and research methods in the information
age.

NB: Required of all media and communication
majors and all corporate communication majors in
second year.
Prerequisite(s): None. (0-0; 3-0)

MCOM 192 Communication
Colloquium: Professional Preparation
(1 sem. hr.)
This course operates in conjunction with MCOM
190 “Communication Colloquium.” Students
gather with the entire department together on a
weekly basis to talk about important issues facing
communication students and professionals,
consider the connections between their faith and
their careers, build community in the program,
and prepare to find and build their careers after
graduating. Students dive deeper into this last goal
of professional preparation in this course than
MCOM 190.

Prerequisite(s): None. (3, 0)




                                                281
MCOM 211: Introduction to Film
Studies (3 sem. hrs.)
Course covers the art of cinema as it explores
issues and ideas related to the study of film as an
aesthetic, moral, textual, social, and technical art.
In doing so, it will help students investigate and
discover how to “read” and interpret narrative
film from a variety of perspectives. It will also give
students the opportunity to create short films that
explore cinematic expression from a hands-on
perspective. Though the emphasis will be on
traditional narrative approaches to cinema the
course will also compare and contrast this
approach with experimental, alternative, and
transgressive cinemas that challenge the status quo
and offer unconventional and unorthodox
perspectives. Ethical and spiritual considerations
from a Christian perspective will also be explored.

NB: Viewing fee. Required of all film
concentrations and minors.
Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0; 3-0)

MCOM 221 Digital Filmmaking I (3
sem. hrs.)
This introductory course in the art and craft of
digital video production familiarizes students with
the “classical” approach to cinematic aesthetics
and techniques. Students work individually and
collaboratively as they produce, shoot, and edit
short films. Emphasis is placed on analyzing films
from a filmmaker’s perspective.

NB: Lab fee. Fulfils university core requirement
for aesthetic and performance inquiry. Fulfils
departmental visual creativity competency
requirement; required of all film concentrations
and minors.
Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0; 0-0)

MCOM 231 Fundamentals of Digital
Design (3 sem. hrs.)
An active exploration of graphic design essentials,
creative ideation methods, and visual
communication techniques. Students use creative
thinking methodologies to experiment with a wide
range of design approaches, evaluate the aesthetic
and conceptual value of specific design solutions,
and sharpen their creative, critical thinking, and
perceptual skills.
NB: Lab fee. Fulfils university core requirement
for aesthetic and performance inquiry. Fulfils
departmental visual creativity requirement.
(Priority given to media and communication
students.)
Cross-listed: ART 250.
Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0; 3-0)

MCOM 240 Game Design for Video
Games (3 sem. hrs.)
A continuation of GAME 140 “Introduction to
Game Design.” Students focus on applying game
design principles explicitly to the video game
medium. By engaging in constant design projects
and exercises, students will broaden their
knowledge of design theory and develop the
necessary skills to rapidly prototype and test game
design ideas.

Cross-listed: GAME 240.
Prerequisite(s): GAME/MCOM 140.

MCOM 251 Introduction to Journalism
(3 sem. hrs.)
The journalistic principle of “serving the public
interest” has been understood as serving one’s
own public, social class or nation. With the global
reach of media, journalism’s “public” becomes the
citizens of the world. How are ethical principles of
objectivity, balance and independence understood
in a global context? How can journalism help
citizens understand local, national, and global
problems such as poverty, environmental
degradation, technological inequalities, and
political instability? Students examine Canadian
and international media, evaluate the news
process, consider the role of reporters in this
process, and learn basic news writing.

NB: Course fee. Fulfils University core
requirement for social and global inquiry.
Prerequisite(s): MCOM 191. (3-0; 0-0)

MCOM 252 Introduction to Public
Relations (3 sem. hrs.)
In this course, students examine the role of public
relations within and among various sectors of
society including business, government, and
nonprofit organizations. Case studies are used to
illustrate the profession and practice of public
relations where possible, and ethical standards in


                                                 282
public relations are emphasized. Media, consumer,
employee, and community relations, as well as
ethical standards in the public relations industry
are examined.

NB: Required of all corporate communication
majors.
Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0; 0-0)

MCOM 261 It’s Personal: Introduction
to Narrative Nonfiction (3 sem. hrs.)
“You can’t make this stuff up.” Narrative
nonfiction’s creative tools bring true stories to life.
In this introductory workshop-style course,
students analyze examples of compelling
published literary memoir, personal narrative, and
critical writing about pop culture. They interpret
the author’s craft, study general editorial
requirements, and formulate aesthetic principles
for their own feature material. Students will write
several pieces in a variety of nonfiction genres;
critique each other’s work; and revise their own—
with the intent to publish. Fulfills departmental
writing competency requirement.

NB: Required of all professional writing stream
majors and professional writing minors.
Prerequisite(s): MCOM 191. (3-0 or 3-0)

MCOM 271 Introduction to Leadership
Communication (3 sem. hrs.)
Leadership Communication introduces students to
the art, science, and practice of influencing and
being influenced by others in diverse contexts.
The course explores the role of communication in
building credibility, exercising power, motivating,
and expressing one’s leadership style. It also
considers the topics of followership, the ethics of
leadership, leadership development, and leading in
times of crisis. The course serves as a foundation
for future studies in the leadership communication
stream within the Department of Media and
Communication.

NB: Required of all leadership stream majors in
second year. Fulfils corporate communication
leadership communication requirement.
Prerequisite(s): None.

MCOM 272 Organizational
Communication (3 sem. hrs.)
This course introduces students to the importance
of communication within organizations.
Organizational communication theory is discussed
as it relates to climate, dyads, small group, public,
and mediated communication. Students apply
theory in several business writing and speaking
assignments.

NB: Course fee. Required of all corporate
communication majors.
Prerequisite(s): None. (0-0; 3-0)

MCOM 281 Public Speaking (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course requires students to research, create,
and deliver speeches on topics and issues that
reflect personal beliefs and values. In doing so
they discern diverse materials, consider logical and
ethical demands, and analyze their audience in
order to create socially and globally responsible
rhetorical messages.

NB: Fulfils University core requirement for
experiential and embodied inquiry. Required of all
students majoring in this department.
Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0 or 3-0)

MCOM 290 Introductory Special
Topics in Media and Communication
(3 sem. hrs.)
Topics vary from year to year.

NB: Possible fee.

MCOM 311 Television and Culture (3
sem. hrs.)
This course provides an in-depth look at television
as a mass medium with particular financial and
cultural constraints. Students examine the
decision-making process behind television
programming, learn criteria for viewing television
critically, and ask how Christians may respond to
television responsibly.

NB: Course fee. Not offered every year.
Prerequisite(s): At least third year standing. (3-0;
0-0)

MCOM 312 Video Games and Culture
(3 sem. hrs.)


                                                 283
This course considers the social and cultural
impact of video games in contemporary culture
from a Christian perspective. Students play, read
about, write about, and critically engage a wide
variety of computer and video games.

NB: Lab fee; not offered every year.
Prerequisite(s): At least third year standing. (0-0;
3-0)

MCOM 313 Social Media: Theory and
Practice (3 sem. hrs.)
Prepares students to use social media
professionally and to culturally engage these same
tools of communication with a critical perspective.
The course invites students to discover and
analyze best practices in social media marketing
and community building, as well as to apply theory
to critical investigations of the cultural roles and
impacts of current digital media, both in North
America and around the world, with the goal of
helping students become both effective
communicators and highly ethical and faithful
global citizens who can positively impact their
profession and their society.

NB: Fulfils University core requirement for social
and global inquiry. Fulfills corporate
communication media studies requirement. Not
offered every year.
Prerequisite(s): At least third year standing. (0-0;
3-0)

MCOM 314 Hollywood and the
Superhero (3 sem. hrs.)
This course explores the nature and development
of the Superhero figure and myth from its ancient
origins to the contemporary Hollywood
blockbuster craze. Emphasis will be placed upon
exploring the Superhero as myth, archetype, icon,
moral hero, and anti-hero, and investigates why
the Superhero type figure has been a perennial
character and what the current emphasis on
superheroes might tell us about contemporary
social, moral, political, gender, and cultural
concerns.

NB: Viewing fee.
Prerequisite(s): At least third year standing. (3-0
or 3-0)
MCOM 315 Film History II (3 sem.
hrs.)
Emphasizes the role films and filmmakers have
played in impacting culture and reflecting their
historical milieu, especially as they relate to the
events and traumas of World War II and the Cold
War. Students explore key post-World War II film
movements including Neo-Realism, the French
New Wave, the rise of art house and nationalist
cinemas, and the moral and social rebellions of the
1960s and 70s.

NB: Viewing fee. Fulfils University core
requirement for social and global inquiry. Not
offered every year. Required of film
concentrations and minors.
Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0 or 3-0)

MCOM 321 Digital Filmmaking II (3
sem. hrs.)
This advanced production course focuses on the
key components necessary for making creative
and compelling narrative and non-narrative short
films. Topics include concept and script
development, cinematography techniques,
effective mise-en-scene integration, and
production workflow. A key component also
includes writing, producing, shooting, and editing
short films.

NB: Lab fee.
Prerequisite(s): MCOM 221. (0-0; 3-0)

MCOM 322 Digital Film Post-
Production (3 sem. hrs.)
This course examines the art and theory of digital
film editing and the post-production process. The
goal is to help students understand the role editing
plays in the filmic and television viewing
experience, especially the way shot selection,
pacing, rhythm, sound, etc., impact a scene’s
development and how various editing techniques
and aesthetics relate to dramatic and narrative
storytelling. Historical, theoretical, and critical
dimensions are addressed as students research
seminal examples of film and video editing. This
intense workshop offers a real-world simulation
component as students work under strict
deadlines to edit and complete digital film
projects.



                                                 284
NB: Lab fee. Not offered every year.
Prerequisite(s): MCOM 221 or instructor’s
consent. (0-0; 3-0)

MCOM 323 Digital Recording I (3
sem. hrs.)
An introduction to various aspects of the
recording arts with emphasis on working within
the digital (virtual) studio environment with
Cubase and other Virtual Instrument software.

NB: Lab fee.
Cross-listed: MUSI 340.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 226 or third year standing.
(1-3 or 1-3)

MCOM 331 Imaging and Illustration
Design (3 sem. hrs.)
This course explores the conception, production,
and analysis of imagery in graphic communication
design, including photos, illustrations, and graphic
marks. Imagery-based problems are investigated in
multiple design contexts and formats. Specialized
rendering techniques, digital studio practices, and
iconographic style development are considered.

NB: Lab fee. Fulfills corporate communication
major media studies requirement.
Cross-listed: ART 361.
Prerequisite(s): ART 250 or MCOM 231, and
one of the following: MCOM 111, 171, ART 181,
182, or instructor’s consent. (0-0; 3-0)

MCOM 332 Symbol and Typography
Design (3 sem. hrs.)
An exploration of integrated conceptual thinking
and formal experimentation with type and related
symbol systems in graphic communications.
Emphasis is placed on type as image, principles of
typesetting, hierarchy, and structure. The complex
interaction of type in relation to other graphic
elements in multiple design contexts and formats
is considered.

NB: Lab fee. Fulfills corporate communication
major media studies requirement.
Cross-listed: ART 362.
Prerequisite(s): ART 250 or MCOM 231, and
one of the following: MCOM 112, 171, ART 181,
182, or instructor’s consent. (0-3 or 0-3)
MCOM 333 Format and Layout
Design (3 sem. hrs.)
An exploration of integrated conceptual thinking
and formal experimentation with the structural
and organizing systems at work in graphic
communications. Emphasis is given to the
development of unified graphic systems spanning
multiple design contexts and formats.

NB: Lab fee. Fulfils corporate communication
major media studies requirement.
Cross-listed: ART 363.
Prerequisite(s): ART 250 or MCOM 231, and
one of the following: MCOM 111, 171, ART 181,
182, or instructor’s consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

MCOM 334 Interaction Design (3 sem.
hrs.)
Introduces students to the design of interactive
digital experiences with a focus on website design,
User Experience (UX) design, and User Interface
(UI) design. Students will learn the core concepts
and principles of interaction design by working
through technical and design projects using
industry standard design software. Students leave
this course with the ability to build basic websites
and design digital experiences that follow current
interaction design standards and methodologies.

NB: Lab fee.
Cross-listed: ART 364.
Prerequisite(s): ART 250 or MCOM 231. (3-0 or
3-0)

MCOM 340 Advanced Game Design (3
sem. hrs.)
An in-depth look at game design theory and
aesthetic criticism pertaining to video games.
Through the use of significant projects, students
will further develop practical design skills, and
investigate theoretical topics such as the ability of
games to communicate, simulate and persuade.
Students will examine the connections between
game design and faith, spirituality, ethics, morality,
and the Christian tradition in order to become
game designers who are thoughtful shapers of
culture rather than simply entertainment
technicians.

Cross-listed: GAME 340.
Prerequisite(s): GAME/MCOM 240.


                                                  285
MCOM 341 Interactive Storytelling (3
sem. hrs.)
An in-depth look at the various forms of writing
for video games. Students will study and practice
game story scripting, writing for interface,
dialogue and narration, as well as video game
technical writing. Students will develop skills to
handle the many writing tasks necessary for a
game development project. Students who are not
part of the Game Development program will also
benefit from taking this course, as it is also
applicable to non-game forms of media
production.

Cross-listed: GAME 341.
Prerequisite(s): One of ENGL 207, 208, MCOM
261, 351, 361, 362, 461.

MCOM 351 Business and Technical
Writing (3 sem. hrs.)
This workshop course offers students effective
techniques for written and oral communication
within the fields of business and industry,
including key aspects of technical correspondence,
report writing, oral communication, and the job-
seeking process.

NB: Course fee. Required of corporate
communication majors.
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 103, 104; MCOM 191,
and at least third year standing or instructor’s
permission. (3-0 or 3-0)

MCOM 352 Multimedia Journalism (3
sem. hrs.)
A hands-on seminar that explores the use of text,
images, sound, video, data and graphics to tell
stories in an engaging way. Students will leverage
digital tools, social media platforms, and research
to inform, educate or entertain. The course
explores historical aspects, storytelling structures,
design concepts, ethical issues, writing styles, and
the business of media. Fulfills departmental
writing competency requirement.

NB: Lab fee. Fulfils corporate communication
major writing requirement.
Prerequisite(s): MCOM 231 and 251, or
instructor’s consent. (0-0; 3-0)
MCOM 354 Sports Journalism (3 sem.
hrs.)
A survey of the principles, practices, and ethical
considerations of sports journalism with emphasis
on newsgathering, storytelling, editing, audience
consideration, and Canadian Press Style. Students
apply skills in the university sports context to meet
real deadlines and gain from peer critique.

NB: Strongly recommend one of MCOM 221,
251, 261, or 352. Writing samples may be required
for instructor’s approval.
Prerequisite(s): At least third year standing, and
approval of the instructor.

MCOM 361 Screenwriting (3 sem. hrs.)
This course introduces students to the history, art,
and craft of cogent short-form film and television
writing. It involves theoretical and applied
components. Topics include: concept, conflict,
and character development, writing treatments,
structure and plot point crafting, genre
considerations, theme and character dynamics,
mood and stylistic concerns, etc. Selective scripts
from the course may be used in advanced
production courses.

NB: Lab fee.
Prerequisite(s): None.

MCOM 362 Playwriting (3 sem. hrs.)
Playwriting is a workshop course designed for any
student interested in developing their storytelling
skills by writing for the stage. Students will study
major components of playwriting, including
dramatic formatting, structure, plot, and character
development, writing actionable dialogue, analysis,
dramaturgy, and more. Students will deepen their
understanding of these components and of the
creative process through writing exercises,
pitching ideas, reading work out loud, and
respectfully providing and receiving feedback. By
the end of the semester, students will have written
one or more plays.

Cross-listed: THTR 325.
Prerequisite(s): Upper-level standing. (0-0; 3-0)

MCOM 369 Adventures in Narrative
Non-Fiction (3 sem. hrs.)



                                                 286
“What makes this story so good?” Compelling
magazine and newspaper writing employs
narrative nonfiction’s creative tools to bring true
stories to life. In this intermediate workshop-style
course, students analyze examples of the best
published memoir, personal narrative, travel
writing, and immersion journalism to interpret the
author’s craft and formulate aesthetic principles to
apply to their own creative work. Students will
write several pieces in a variety of non-fiction
genres; critique each other’s work; revise their
own; and perform one piece during the Festival of
the Arts, Media + Culture.
NB: Course fee. Fulfils university core
requirement for aesthetic and performance
inquiry. Fulfils theory and criticism requirement
for media and communication major.
Prerequisite(s): MCOM 251 or 261; or ENGL
207 or 208; or instructor’s permission (writing
samples may be required). (3-0 or 3-0)

MCOM 371 Relational Communication
(3 sem. hrs.)
This course provides an in-depth look at
communication in close relationships. The course
begins with models of relational communication
and proceeds with self- and other perceptions,
verbal and nonverbal strategies and rituals, then
the larger processes of communication in
developing, sustaining, struggling, and ending
relationships. Three featured topics include the
role of conflict, verbal abuse, and personal style as
factors in close relationships.

NB: Course fee. Fulfils leadership communication
requirement for corporate communication majors.
Prerequisite(s): At least third year standing. (3-0;
0-0)

MCOM 372 Cross-cultural
Communications (3 sem. hrs.)
This course is about the nature of cross-cultural
interaction. Cultural concepts and contexts are
explored through taxonomies, theories, and
comparative analysis. Through in-class and out-of-
class activities, students become self-aware and
other-aware. Students also experiment with
cultural behaviours and cultural change, aiming to
increase both explanatory and predictive cultural
knowledge, and enhance behavioural
competencies.
NB: Fulfils University core requirement for social
and global inquiry. Required of all corporate
communication majors. Fulfils theory and
criticism requirement for media and
communication major.
Cross-listed: ANTH 302, LING 302.
Prerequisite(s): Registration preference given to
media and communication majors, concentrations,
or minors, as well as corporate communication
majors, TESL certificate, Inter-cultural religious
studies, and international studies programs. (3-0 or
3-0)

MCOM 373 Classical and
Contemporary Rhetoric (3 sem. hrs.)
The rhetoric of classical Greece and Rome, the
medieval era, and modern and postmodern
approaches to rhetorical practice are surveyed in
relation to political, social, and mass media
contexts and practices.

NB: Fulfils theory and criticism requirement for
media and communication majors.
Prerequisite(s): Third or fourth year standing. (3-
0 or 3-0)

MCOM 381 Debate and
Argumentation (3 sem. hrs.)
The study of argumentation theory as applied in
the practice of debate for the careful analysis and
advancement of propositions regarding important
contemporary issues. Students participate in two
one-on-one debates and one two-on-two debate.
NB: May fulfil department public speaking
requirement with chair’s approval.
Prerequisite(s): MCOM 281 or instructor’s
consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

MCOM 390 Advanced Selected Topics
in Media and Communication (3 sem.
hrs.)
Topics vary from year to year.

NB: Not offered every year. See department
chair. Possible fee.
Prerequisite(s): Varies with topic.

MCOM 391, 392, 393 Communication
Field Placement (1, 2, 3 sem. hrs.)



                                                287
This field placement provides students with a
work-and-learn experience in the field of media
and communication, both on- or off campus. In
addition to their workplace experience, practica
students meet regularly as a class to explore
workplace issues and communication challenges.
Class sessions are formatted as a professional
workshop, whereby students demonstrate
leadership skills in public speaking, visual
presentation, and group interaction. Course
assignments require students to respond to
reflective questions about their own
communication strengths and personal
development as emerging professionals. Not
required of media and communication majors, but
3 s.h. required of corporate communication
majors.

NB: Open only to media and communication
majors, concentrations, and minors; corporate
communication majors; and students working
with student media (i.e., student newspaper,
student yearbook, student video yearbook). Only 3
sem. hrs. apply toward the major; others go to
electives for a maximum total of 8 sem. hrs.
Communication Practicum courses are pass/fail
courses.
Prerequisite(s): Second year standing or above.

MCOM 395 Central America Field
Study (3 sem. hrs.)
This experiential and interdisciplinary course
fosters interaction with diverse physical and
human environments. It provides exposure to the
region’s history, religions, politics, and socio-
economic realities that shape the communication
and cultures of Central America, and introduces
students to cross-cultural communication.

Cross-listed: GENV 395.
Prerequisite(s): Second year standing or
instructor permission. (3-0 or 3-0)

MCOM 396 East Africa Field Study (3
sem. hrs.)
This experiential and interdisciplinary course
fosters interaction with diverse physical and
human environments. It provides exposure to the
region’s history, religions, politics, and socio-
economic realities that shape the communication
and cultures of East Africa and introduces
students to cross-cultural communication.

Cross-listed: GENV 396.
Prerequisite(s): Second year standing or
instructor permission. (3-0 or 3-0)

MCOM 399 Communication Theory in
Everyday Life (3 sem. hrs.)
An intermediate-level study of contemporary
theories in communication with an eye to their
applicability for observation, explanation, and
evaluation of everyday communication. Students
learn to pose questions and answers in theory
construction regarding communication issues,
processes, and outcomes.

NB: Fulfils theory and criticism requirement for
media and communication major.
Prerequisite(s): At least second year standing. (3-
0 or 3-0)

MCOM 411 Media, Culture, and
Criticism (3 sem. hrs.)
A seminar investigating the cultural environment
in which we live as the context of all
communication. Selected media within
contemporary culture are explored in terms of
their contribution to the postmodern age.

NB: Fulfils theory and criticism requirement for
media and communication majors, and the media
studies requirement for corporate communication
majors.
Prerequisite(s): Third or fourth year standing. (0-
0; 3-0)

MCOM 412 Masters of Cinema (3 sem.
hrs.)
This seminar focuses on key filmmakers who have
been highly influential in the development and
expression of thought-provoking narrative and
non-narrative cinema, including documentary and
animation. As such, it focuses on a broad array of
filmmakers, styles, and genres as students explore
the way cinematic structure, stylistics, aesthetics,
and techniques creates a deeper understanding of
life. Filmmakers studied include masters from
Hollywood, Europe, Asia, Africa, and the Middle
East.



                                                288
NB: Viewing fee. Fulfils theory and criticism
requirement for media and communication
majors.
Prerequisite(s): None.

MCOM 421 Digital Recording II (3
sem. hrs.)
Advanced study and practice of the technologies
pertaining to professional digital recording.

NB: Lab fee.
Cross-listed: MUSI 341.
Prerequisite(s): MCOM 323/MUSI 340, or
instructor’s consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

MCOM 422 Digital Film Directing (3
sem. hrs.)
This course introduces students to the history,
theory, and craft of digital film directing. As a
workshop, it involves critical, and applied
components. Topics include the multiple roles of
the director, scene, and script analysis, creating
potent production concepts, creative cinematics
and techniques, auditioning, and working with
actors. Key components of the course include
shooting monologues, scenes, and making a short
film.

NB: Not offered every year.
Prerequisite(s): MCOM 221 or instructor’s
consent. (0-0; 3-0)

MCOM 451 Public Relations Writing
(3 sem. hrs.)
An advanced course that focuses on the style and
technique of writing for public relations and
corporate communication. Students discover the
dynamics of strategic and persuasive writing while
creating key pieces such as brochures, ads,
newsletters, and press releases. Opportunity is
given to create a communications package for a
public relations client.

NB: Course fee. Fulfils corporate communication
writing requirement.
Prerequisite(s): MCOM 252 or 261, or
instructor’s consent. (0-0; 3-0)
MCOM 452 Feature Writing for
Newspapers and Magazines (3 sem.
hrs.)
Building on skills developed in MCOM 251 or
261, students study the best in magazine and
newspaper feature writing and produce several
pieces of their own with the intent of publishing
their work.

NB: Fulfils theory and criticism requirement for
media and communication majors; fulfils
corporate communication writing requirement.
Prerequisite(s): MCOM 251 or 261; ENGL 103,
104, and third or fourth year standing. (3-0; 0-0)

MCOM 453 Editing for Newspapers
and Magazines (3 sem. hrs.)
Building on skills introduced in MCOM 251, 261,
or 452, students learn the art of editing for
magazines and newspapers. Students study
examples of published magazines and newspapers
(both print and online), write and edit a piece of
their own with the intent to publish their work,
and apply their knowledge to pieces submitted for
publication in a student publication to be created
around this course.

NB: Course fee. Fulfills corporate communication
writing requirement.
Prerequisite(s): MCOM 251 or 261 or 452; or
ENGL 103 and 104; or ENGL 207 or 208; or
instructor’s permission (writing samples may be
required). (3-0 or 3-0)

MCOM 461 On the Road: Travel and
Adventure Journalism (3 sem. hrs.)
Explore the world of travel journalism and
adventure writing. In this senior workshop course,
students will critique each other’s work and read,
discuss, and analyze travel literature to understand
its roots and conventions. Students need not be
world travelers to write their own travel-based
essays: their unique observations, voice, and
writing ability all contribute to make a good story,
even in their own backyards. Builds on storytelling
techniques, critical theory, and application of
aesthetic principles acquired in introductory and
intermediate courses in narrative nonfiction.

Prerequisite(s): MCOM 251 or 261; or
permission of the instructor.


                                                289
MCOM 469 Professional Writing
Capstone (3 sem. hrs.)
Serves as opportunity for students to bring diverse
learning and skills from across their program in
order to research, write and/or carry out a senior
creative thesis, portfolio, or publishing project in
literary journalism or narrative nonfiction.
Students gain skills in curation, editing, project
management, aesthetic research methodology, and
integrative and performative thinking. Students
will gain deeper scholarly and professional
understanding of aesthetic research methodology,
and integrative and performative thinking.
Students will gain deeper scholarly and
professional understanding of aesthetic
considerations in communication, forge
professional and academic contacts, and
demonstrate mastery of relevant theory, principles,
and writing strategies. The course concludes with
a public performance to peers, faculty, and
professional leaders.

NB: Course fee. Required of students majoring in
the professional writing stream or minor. May be
taken by other students with permission of
instructor (sample writing may be required).
Prerequisite(s): Students must be majoring in
Media + Communication (Professional Writing
Stream), and have third or fourth year standing.

MCOM 471 Persuasive
Communication (3 sem. hrs.)
This course investigates the art, science, and
practice of persuasive communication in its many
forms and contexts. It examines theories and
research in human influence and how language,
images, and non-verbal cues can mold people’s
attitudes and actions. There is opportunity to carry
out a social science project in interpersonal or
mediated persuasion, and to seriously consider the
ethical implications of one’s persuasive efforts.

NB: Fulfils theory and criticism requirement for
media and communication majors and fulfils
leadership requirement for corporate
communication majors.
Prerequisite(s): MCOM 171, or permission of
instructor, and at least third year standing. (0-0; 3-
0)
MCOM 472 Leadership
Communication in Multi-cultural
Contexts (3 sem. hrs.)
Students explore the complexities of leadership
communication in multi-cultural, non-western
contexts through topics such as gender and social
structures, motivation, decision-making,
negotiating conflict, and managing projects and
change. The course draws on leadership theories,
metaphors, and global leadership research to
define culturally preferred leadership attributes
and behaviours, and effective cross-cultural
communication in comparative global settings.

NB: Fulfils theory and criticism requirement for
media and communication majors and fulfils
leadership requirement for corporate
communication majors.
Cross-listed: ANTH 452.
Prerequisite(s): MCOM 372. (0-0; 3-0)

MCOM 473 Women, Communication,
and Leadership (3 sem. hrs.)
This course focuses on central current themes in
the study of women in positions of power and
leadership in Western society. Students focus on
gendered communication patterns and tendencies,
specifically concerning women in positions of
influence in politics and media.

NB: Not offered every year.
Prerequisite(s): At least third year standing,
and/or permission of instructor. (0-0; 3-0)

MCOM 474 Language and Gender (3
sem. hrs.)
A survey course of the central themes in the study
of gender-differentiated language use, such as
differences in conversational practice,
conversational differences in mixed talk and
single-sex talk, as well as the complexity in
intimate talk between men and women.

NB: Not offered every year.
Prerequisite(s): LING 210 or PSYC 315 or
third- or fourth-year media and communication
standing.

MCOM 475 Communication and
Diversity (3 sem. hrs.)


                                                 290
This seminar style class explores various and
complex dimensions of diversity and inclusion in
the workplace and in society. Students examine
the barriers to professional advancement that are
faced by non-mainstream groups. The course
proposes an Inclusive Workplace Model and
effective communication for managing
complexity, engaging diversity, navigating
difference, and removing obstacles to inclusion
and to organizational effectiveness and growth.

NB: Fulfils leadership communication
requirement for corporate communication major.
Prerequisite(s): At least third year standing.

MCOM 479 Leadership
Communication Capstone (3 sem. hrs.)
Students bring diverse learning and skills from
across their program in order to research and
write and/or carry out a senior thesis or
organizational project in leadership or strategic
communication. Students gain skills in project
management, research methodology, and
integrative thinking in order to collect social
scientific data, advance complex arguments,
and/or help an organization achieve its
communication goals. Students will gain deeper
scholarly and professional understanding of
communication, forge professional and academic
contacts, and demonstrate mastery of relevant
theory, principles and writing strategies. Students
conclude the course with a public presentation to
peers, faculty, and professional leaders regarding
the main project.

Prerequisites: Required of all students majoring
in Media + Communication (Leadership Stream)
or Corporate Communication with third or fourth
year standing.

MCOM 490 Directed Studies in Media
and Communication (3 sem. hrs.)
Students are required to produce an outline of the
topics to be studied in consultation with the
instructor. A course of reading and writing is
pursued according to the approved outline.

NB: In keeping with University policy, students
are not allowed to do a directed study in a course
currently offered by the Media and
Communication Department. May fulfil special
program requirements depending on nature of
studies.
Prerequisite(s): 12 sem. hrs. lower-level Media
and Communication courses and instructor’s
consent.

MCOM 491 Transformational
Development and Leadership (3 sem.
hrs.)
The course provides opportunity for the
articulation of transformational leadership (both
cultural and personal). It requires leaders to
communicate their vision of growth and
opportunity. Students gain insight into effective
leadership communication as they examine the
worldviews, history, and economic challenges in
developing nations (in East Africa and Central
America). This course explores underlying cultural
and faith-based worldviews by means of an
interdisciplinary travel study. Specifically, the
course explores social and humanitarian responses
to critical social issues in the Global South.
Through readings, lectures (including field
practitioners and experts), and field experiences,
students are exposed to the complex nature of
human problems and social responses. Students
seek to understand critical social issues in light of
cultural, environmental, economic, political, and
historical frameworks. Of particular interest is the
manner in which religious worldview shapes one’s
response to the disadvantaged, and how the
transformational model informs leadership
behaviour and the development process.

NB: Fulfils University core requirement for social
and global inquiry. For the Kenya travel study,
students may take this alone or as a second course.
Cross-listed: IDIS 450.
Prerequisite(s): Upper level standing (minimum
of 70 sem. hrs.) and instructor’s consent.



Music
MUSI 100 Repertory and Studio Class
(0 sem. hrs.)
A performance class for students of applied music
for the purpose of gaining experience in public
performance and increasing knowledge of music
literature. Required of all music majors in each


                                                 291
semester of the program; recommended for all
other students registered for applied music
lessons.

NB: Pass/Fail course.
Prerequisite(s): None. (0-1; 0-1)

MUSI 110 Fundamentals of Music (3
sem. hrs.)
A course for teachers, youth workers, and
recreation workers, as well as students who wish
to pursue advanced theory studies but lack the
appropriate background. Topics covered include
notation of pitch and rhythm; intervals, scales and
modes; concept of key, triads, and seventh chords;
introductory melody; and accompaniment writing.

Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0 or 3-0)

MUSI 131 Music History from 1600 to
1800 (3, 3 sem. hrs.)
Traces the historical development of Western
music in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
Organized in a largely chronological fashion, the
course investigates developments in musical
genres, ensembles, and performance
circumstances through the Baroque and Classical
historical eras in music. The methodology of the
course will comprise examination of the musical
artifacts, the circumstances from which they arose,
and their ultimate impact on the trajectory of
musical history. There will be due consideration of
the reception histories of the work and the ways
those valuations have changed over time, up to
and including the present day. Apprehension of
the music itself, through guided listening and
methods of analysis suited to each epoch under
study, will also form an integral part of the course.
The ways that theoretical and interpretive
practices varied over the period in question will
form a related part of the class discussions.

Prerequisite(s): Satisfactory performance on the
music placement test or MUSI 110; MUSI 110
may be taken concurrently. (3-0; 3-0)

MUSI 132 Music History from 1800 to
Present (3 sem. hrs.)
Traces the historical development of Western
music from the beginning of the nineteenth
century to present day. Organized in a largely
chronological fashion, the course investigates
developments in musical genres, ensembles, and
performance circumstances through the
Romantic, Modern, and Postmodern historical
eras in music. The methodology of the course will
comprise examination of the musical artifacts, the
circumstances from which they arose, and their
ultimate impact on the trajectory of musical
history past, present, and future. There will be due
consideration of the reception histories of the
work and the ways those valuations have changed
over time, up to and including the present day.
Apprehension of the music itself, through guided
listening and methods of analysis suited to each
epoch under study, will also form an integral part
of the course. The ways that theoretical and
interpretive practices varied over the period in
question will form a related part of the class
discussions.

Prerequisite(s): Satisfactory performance on the
music placement test or MUSI 110; MUSI 110
may be taken concurrently. (3-0; 3-0)

MUSI 140 Applied Keyboard
Musicianship (1 sem. hr.)
The course is designed to prepare Music majors
with keyboard skills generally expected of all
musicians. Skills covered include score reading,
transposition, simple harmonization, and
improvising simple chordal accompaniment.

NB: Open to declared Music majors and Music
Education minor and concentration students only.
Prerequisite(s): None. (0-2 or 0-2)

MUSI 220 Introductory Special Topics
in Music (1-3 sem. hrs.)
Topics vary from year to year.

Prerequisite(s): Vary depending on course.

MUSI 225, 226 Tonal Harmony I and
Tonal Harmony II (3, 3 sem. hrs.)
An integrated course including a brief review of
basic rudiments of music, four-part written
harmony, analysis, introduction to form and
counterpoint. Harmonic elements include diatonic
triads and their inversions, harmonization of
melodies and basses, dominant and diminished
seventh chords and secondary seventh chords.


                                                292
Sight singing and ear training including melodic,
harmonic, and rhythmic materials are included.

Prerequisite(s): Satisfactory performance on the
music placement test or MUSI 110. (3-2; 3-2)

MUSI 227 Songwriting for Worship I (3
sem. hrs.)
The study of song composition (songwriting) with
an emphasis on the student producing songs in a
variety of styles and for different contexts, but
particularly for worship settings (either corporate,
performance, or other). Compositional topics
include song structure, lyric development,
harmonic organization, and instrumentation,
considered in the contexts of congregational
worship, contemporary performance, Psalm and
hymn. The course format involves group
workshop sessions and individual tutorials, with
the instructor guiding the students.

Prerequisite(s): MUSI 110 or 225, or instructor’s
permission.

MUSI 239 Songs of Faith (3 sem. hrs.)
An examination of meanings and purposes of
sacred/church ‘song’ in the context of the
believing community, from OT Psalm to early
church hymn, chant to Reformation hymn, revival
hymn and gospel song to contemporary worship
chorus. The course will be concerned with seeing
the varied musical and textual expression of God’s
people throughout their history, understanding
these expressions within the worship culture of
their time, and appreciating the breadth of
repertoire of the church’s songs.

Cross-listed: WRSH 239.
Prerequisite(s): WRSH 101.

MUSI 309 Worship and Leadership (3
sem. hrs.)
An examination of leadership issues in the
worship practices of the contemporary evangelical
church. Through exploration of a range of
approaches to the arts, liturgy, worship
evangelism, service design, and curation, the
course is concerned with (1) theological and
philosophical leadership issues for a biblical
worship practice in a postmodern culture, and (2)
practical concerns relating to development of a
vibrant local church worship ministry.

NB: Not offered every year
Cross-listed: WRSH 301.
Prerequisite(s): RELS 111/112 and upper-level
standing.

MUSI 310 Special Topics in Music (3
sem. hrs.)
Topics vary from year to year.

NB: Not offered every year. Course may be
repeated.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of music or
instructor’s permission. (3-0 or 3-0)

MUSI 320 Arranging for Worship
Teams (2 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to arranging techniques for the
most common instruments and voice groupings
found in church worship teams. Materials are
taken from contemporary songs and more
traditional church repertoire. Student
arrangements are performed as often as possible.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 225, 226, or permission of
the instructor. (0-0; 2-0)

MUSI 325 Tonal Harmony III (3 sem.
hrs.)
Advanced integrated study of music theory,
including written harmony, form and analysis, and
counterpoint. Harmonic elements include
secondary seventh chords; dominant ninth,
eleventh, and thirteenth chords; chromatic
harmony; modulation; and writing in two, three,
and four parts. Further studies in harmonic and
melodic dictation and sight-singing.

Prerequisite(s): MUSI 225, 226. (3-2; 3-2)

MUSI 326 Counterpoint, Form, and
Analysis (3 sem. hrs.)
Advanced integrated study of music theory,
including written harmony, form and analysis, and
counterpoint. Harmonic elements include
secondary seventh chords; dominant ninth,
eleventh, and thirteenth chords; chromatic



                                                  293
harmony; modulation; and writing in two, three,
and four parts. Further studies in harmonic and
melodic dictation and sight-singing.

Prerequisite(s): MUSI 325. (3-2; 3-2)

MUSI 327, 328, 329 Composition (2 or
3 sem. hrs.)
The study of composition with emphasis on the
student producing pieces in a variety of genres and
styles (generally short works for soloists, small
ensembles, or digital media). The course format
involves weekly sessions of a private or semi-
private nature, with the instructor guiding the
student in his or her work. (Workload
expectations vary with the credit assigned, 2 or 3
sem. hrs. credit.)

NB: May not be available every semester.
Prerequisite(s): Prior studies in music theory,
preferably MUSI 225, 226, and permission of the
instructor. (0-1-0 or 0-1-0)

MUSI 330 Music History to 1600 (3
sem. hrs.)
A study of musical styles, forms, and composers
up to 1600. This encompasses an evaluation of
ancient, medieval, and Renaissance music.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 131, 132, 225, 226. (3-0 or
3-0)

MUSI 331 Instrumental Literature (3
sem. hrs.)
The course is an introduction to representative
instrumental solo, ensemble, and orchestra
literature for the student’s particular instruments.
Through the study of primary literature (musical
scores), source readings and secondary material,
the student is acquainted with standard
instrumental literature and a variety of
musicological and pedagogical perspectives on this
body of music.

Prerequisite(s): Admission to the instrumental
performance stream or instructor’s consent (upper
level standing). (3-0 or 3-0)
MUSI 333 Keyboard Literature (2 sem.
hrs.)
A survey of solo music for keyboard instruments
from the Renaissance to the present. Works for
the harpsichord, clavichord, and piano are
reviewed.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 131, 132, 225, 226; 325
and 326 (may be taken concurrently). (2-0 or 2-0)

MUSI 334 Songwriting for Worship II
(3 sem. hrs.)
A course for students who have done Songwriting
for Worship I (MUSI 227), and want to explore
working on a self-directed creative project.
Students write original songs, which creatively pair
music and lyrics that will enhance the worship life
of Christians, either in gathered worship or private
devotional worship. A spiritual theme which runs
across the compositions will be emphasized.

Prerequisite(s): MUSI 225 and 227.

MUSI 335 Choral Literature (3 sem.
hrs.)
The development of sacred and secular choral
music from the Middle Ages to the present.
Forms and stylistic considerations are examined in
representative choral works including the mass,
the cantata, the oratorio, and other genres.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 131, 132, 225, 226; and
330 (may be taken concurrently). (3-0 or 3-0)

MUSI 336 Vocal Literature (2 sem.
hrs.)
A study of forms, idioms, and styles characteristic
of solo and chamber song in western art music.
Emphasis is on the literature available in Central
Europe, the British Isles, and North America
from the sixteenth century through to the
twentieth century.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 131, 132, 225, 226; 325
and 326 (may be taken concurrently). (2-0 or 2-0)




                                                294
MUSI 339 Vocal Performance Class (1
sem. hr.)
A study of body movement and stage poise for
various types of singing. The student learns
correct diction in a number of common singing
languages and becomes acquainted with repertoire
for the voice.

Prerequisite(s): MUSI 131, 132, 225, 226; or
instructor’s permission. (1-0 or 1-0)

MUSI 340 Digital Recording I (3 sem.
hrs.)
An introduction to various aspects of the
recording arts with emphasis on working within
the digital (virtual) studio environment with
Cubase and other virtual instrument software.

Cross-listed: MCOM 323.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 226 or third year standing.
(1-3 or 1-3)

MUSI 341 Digital Recording II (3 sem.
hrs.)
Advanced study and practice of the technologies
pertaining to professional digital recording.

Cross-listed: MCOM 421.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 340 or instructor’s
permission. (3-0 or 3-0)

MUSI 350 Popular Music in the
Twentieth Century
This course examines the sources and evolution of
popular music in the last century, popular music as
both an expression of and a creative force in
popular culture, popular music as the rhythmic
antithesis of repression, popular music as a
commodity of mass production and mass culture,
and the means by which the development and
cultural importance of popular music can be
evaluated. Content and method emphasize inquiry
arising from America’s religious influence on
popular culture and the reciprocal influence of
popular culture on the Church, to develop a
reasoned Christian perspective about popular
music.

Prerequisite(s): Upper level standing or
instructor’s permission. (3-0 or 3-0)
MUSI 355 Video Game Sound and
Music (3 sem. hrs.)
A survey of the history and current use of sound
and music in video games. Students will
investigate how audio in video games is unique
and where it draws on other media, as well as
learn about the tools and best practices used in the
creation of sound and music in video games.
Through this study, students will become more
aesthetically informed critics of the use of audio in
video games.

Cross-listed: GAME 320.
Prerequisite(s): Second year standing or higher.

MUSI 356 Sound Design (3 sem. hrs.)
Covers the core components of effective sound
design, such as sound effects, voice recording, and
mixing. This is a hands-on studio-based course in
which students will engage in frequent hands-on
exercises and in-class activities in order to prepare
them to contribute the non-musical audio
elements necessary for video game development.
Students who are not part of the Game
Development program will also benefit from
taking this course, as it is also applicable to non-
game forms of media production.

Cross-listed: GAME 321.
Prerequisite(s): MCOM 323/MUSI 340.

MUSI 357 Advanced Sound Design (3
sem. hrs.)
Continues the topics of GAME 321 “Sound
Design,” goes deeper in those topics (sound
effects, voice recording, mixing), and adds an
extra emphasis on studio direction. This is a
hands-on studio-based course in which students
will engage in frequent hands-on exercises and in-
class activities in order to gain the skills and
aesthetic judgment necessary to excel in their
creation of non-music audio elements of video
games. Students who are not part of the Game
Development program will also benefit from
taking this course, as it is also applicable to non-
game forms of media production.

Cross-listed: GAME 322.
Prerequisite(s): GAME 321/MUSI 356.




                                                 295
MUSI 358 Interactive Sound Design (3
sem. hrs.)
Covers the issues and technologies unique to
creating and deploying sound and music for video
games and other interactive digital media. In this
studio-based course, students will engage in
frequent exercises and projects in order to develop
the advanced knowledge, aesthetic judgment, and
digital audio skills that will help these students
contribute effectively to sound design in Game
Development projects. Students must have at least
a basic understanding of programming to
participate in this course.

Cross-listed: GAME 323.
Prerequisite(s): GAME 321/MUSI 356; CMPT
140.

MUSI 370 Junior Recital (1 sem. hr.)
A 30-minute recital given by a student in the third
year of the performance stream. Recital program
must be submitted to the department chair for
approval.

Prerequisite(s): Admission to the performance
stream or by special permission.

MUSI 371 Instrumental Techniques -
Brass (1 sem. hr.)
The study of brass methods and materials.
Students are given basic instruction on several of
the instruments in each section with strong
components in performance (at the beginning
level) and in instrumental pedagogical techniques
for purposes of teaching in public or private
schools or in church-related instrumental music
programs.

Prerequisite(s): MUSI 225, 226, minimum of
four semesters of applied music lessons on major
instrument or voice, or instructor’s consent. (0-2
or 0-2)

MUSI 372 Instrumental Techniques -
Woodwinds (1 sem. hr.)
The study of woodwinds methods and materials.
Students are given basic instruction on several of
the instruments in each section with strong
components in performance (at the beginning
level) and in instrumental pedagogical techniques
for purposes of teaching in public or private
schools or in church-related instrumental music
programs.

Prerequisite(s): MUSI 225, 226, minimum of
four semesters of applied music lessons on major
instrument or voice, or instructor’s consent. (0-2
or 0-2)

MUSI 373 Instrumental Techniques -
Percussion (1 sem. hr.)
The study of percussion methods and materials.
Students are given basic instruction on several of
the instruments in each section with strong
components in performance (at the beginning
level) and in instrumental pedagogical techniques
for purposes of teaching in public or private
schools or in church-related instrumental music
programs.

Prerequisite(s): MUSI 225, 226, minimum of
four semesters of applied music lessons on major
instrument or voice, or instructor’s consent. (0-2
or 0-2)

MUSI 374 Instrumental Techniques -
Pre-band instruments (1 sem. hr.)
The study of pre-band instruments methods and
materials. Students are given basic instruction on
several of the instruments in each section with
strong components in performance (at the
beginning level) and in instrumental pedagogical
techniques for purposes of teaching in public or
private schools or in church-related instrumental
music programs.

Prerequisite(s): MUSI 225, 226, minimum of
four semesters of applied music lessons on major
instrument or voice, or instructor’s consent. (0-2
or 0-2)

MUSI 401 Worship Design and
Leadership I (3 sem. hr.)
A study of the principles and practice of designing
effective worship services. This course is the
classroom component related to local church
practica, MUSI/WRSH 402 and 403.

NB: MUSI/WRSH 402 is most commonly taken
as a co-requisite.
Cross-listed: WRSH 401.



                                                296
Prerequisite(s): WRSH 201, 301, and upper level
standing.

MUSI 402 Worship Design and
Leadership II (1 sem. hr.)
A local church field placement covering the entire
semester, with scheduled involvement to be
determined early in the semester in cooperation
with the ministry leadership of the local church. It
is expected that the student is given individual
hands-on responsibilities over the semester in
areas of strength, as well as opportunities for
growth in other areas. The student works under
the immediate supervision of a staff or qualified
lay leader in the local church and within the
general supervision of a TWU instructor.

NB: For those involved in leading worship teams
in the field placement, MUSI 320 is required;
MUSI 405 is recommended. For those involved in
leading choirs/ensembles in the field placement,
MUSI 405 is required. For those involved in a
dramatic ministry in the field placement, THTR
383 is required. For those involved in digital
media ministry in the field placement, ART
250/MCOM 231 is required.
Cross-listed: WRSH 402.
Co-requisite(s): MUSI/WRSH 401.
Prerequisite(s): WRSH 201, 301.

MUSI 403 Worship Design and
Leadership III (1 sem. hr.)
A continuation of the local church field placement
of MUSI 402, typically in the same church. The
field placement covers the entire semester, with
scheduled involvement to be determined early in
the semester in cooperation with the ministry
leadership of the local church. It is expected that
hands-on responsibilities in this semester are
increased over those of MUSI 402. The student
works under the immediate supervision of a staff
or qualified lay leader in the local church, and
within the general supervision of a TWU
instructor.

Cross-listed: WRSH 403.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI/WRSH 402. (0-0; 1-0)

MUSI 405 Conducting I (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to the principles and techniques
of choral and instrumental conducting. The
acquisition of fundamental conducting skills,
facility in score reading and analysis, and rehearsal
techniques are emphasized.

Prerequisite(s): MUSI 131, 132, 325, 326; open
to non-Music majors by instructor’s consent. (3-0;
0-0)

MUSI 406 Conducting II (3 sem. hrs.)
The study of conducting techniques required for
difficult examples using traditional compositional
techniques and contemporary compositions,
including aleatory music. Topics include the
refinement of patterns and gestures, score
preparation, and the psychology of musical
organizations. Students from the class may be
selected for performances with the campus
ensembles.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 405. (0-0; 3-0)

MUSI 407 Choral Arranging (3 sem.
hrs.)
An introduction to choral arranging techniques.
Materials are taken from classical music, popular
melodies, carols, and original melodies. Student
arrangements are performed and discussed in class
as often as possible.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 325, 326 (may be taken
concurrently). (3-0 or 3-0)

MUSI 425 Twentieth Century Music (3
sem. hrs.)
An examination of representative musical
literature spanning the twentieth and twenty-first
centuries, including compositional practice,
analysis, and approaches to history. Analytical
issues are examined in response to questions of
structural integrity, pitch and temporal
organization, and the relationship of recent
musical discourse to the tradition of the common
practice. Students develop critical interpretive
tools through engagement with musicological
literature that addresses issues of history, the
relationship of music and culture and aesthetic
value.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.


                                                  297
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 236, 325. (3-0 or 3-0)

MUSI 427, 428, 429 Composition (2 or
3 sem. hrs.)
A continuation of MUSI 329, with emphasis on
major works for larger ensembles. The study of
composition with an emphasis on the student
producing pieces in a variety of genres and styles
(generally more extended works for a variety of
ensembles or digital media). The course format
involves weekly sessions of a private or semi-
private nature, with the instructor guiding the
student in his or her work. The workload
expectations vary with the credit assigned (2 or 3
sem. hrs. credit).

NB: May not be available every semester.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 329 and instructor’s
permission. (0-1-0 or 0-1-0)

MUSI 430 Foundations and Principles
of Music Education (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to the historical, philosophical,
sociological, and psychological foundations of
music education. Topics covered include program
development, teaching methods, administration,
supervision, and evaluation.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: EDUC 430.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 131, 132, 225, 226; and
third or fourth year standing. (3-0 or 3-0)

MUSI 450 Keyboard Pedagogy (1 sem.
hr.)
This course is designed to enable careful
consideration of the dynamics of teacher and
pupil interaction in private teaching, develop basic
instruction skills at the piano with supervision and
constructive feedback, enrich personal awareness
of the current methods and materials available,
and provide comprehensive coaching in studio
management.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): Third or fourth year standing in
performance option, or instructor’s permission.
(1-1 or 1-1)

MUSI 460 Vocal Pedagogy (1 sem. hr.)
Students study the anatomy and physiology of the
breathing and phonatory mechanisms of the
larynx, and the acoustical laws required for
optimum resonation of the singing voice, with
practical applications for interaction of teacher
and pupil in private studio teaching. Students in
the course give basic instruction in voice under
the supervision of the instructor.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): Third or fourth year standing in
performance option, or instructor’s permission.
(1-1 or 1-1)

MUSI 470 Senior Recital (1 sem. hr.)
A one-hour recital, demonstrating ability in a wide
range of musical styles, given by a student in the
fourth year of the performance option. Recital
program must be submitted to the department
chair for approval.

Prerequisite(s): MUSI 370 and, usually, two
semesters of private study subsequent to the
junior recital.



Applied Music
MUSA 101 Repertory and Studio (1
sem. hr.)
A performance class for students of applied music
for the purpose of gaining experience in public
performance and increasing knowledge of music
literature. Required of all music majors in six
semesters of the program; recommended for
declared music and music education minors and
concentrators.

Prerequisite(s): None.

MUSA 102 Repertory and Studio (1
sem. hr.)
A performance class for students of applied music
for the purpose of gaining experience in public
performance and increasing knowledge of music
literature. Required of all music majors in six
semesters of the program; recommended for
declared music and music education minors and
concentrators.



                                               298
Prerequisite(s): MUSA 101.

MUSA 201 Repertory and Studio (1
sem. hr.)
A performance class for students of applied music
for the purpose of gaining experience in public
performance and increasing knowledge of music
literature. Required of all music majors in six
semesters of the program; recommended for
declared music and music education minors and
concentrators

Prerequisite(s): MUSA 102.

MUSA 201 Repertory and Studio (1
sem. hr.)
A performance class for students of applied music
for the purpose of gaining experience in public
performance and increasing knowledge of music
literature. Required of all music majors in six
semesters of the program; recommended for
declared music and music education minors and
concentrators

Prerequisite(s): MUSA 102.

MUSA 301 Repertory and Studio (1
sem. hr.)
A performance class for students of applied music
for the purpose of gaining experience in public
performance and increasing knowledge of music
literature. Required of all music majors in six
semesters of the program; recommended for
declared music and music education minors and
concentrators

Prerequisite(s): MUSA 201.

MUSA 302 Repertory and Studio (1
sem. hr.)
A performance class for students of applied music
for the purpose of gaining experience in public
performance and increasing knowledge of music
literature. Required of all music majors in six
semesters of the program; recommended for
declared music and music education minors and
concentrators.

Prerequisite(s): MUSA 301.
A. Private Lessons
There are 12 weekly lessons in each semester;
Section A denoting half-hour lessons for 1 sem.
hr. of credit, Section B denoting one-hour lessons
for 2 sem. hrs. of credit.

MUSA 1XX:
For first year Music majors or others with
substantial previous instruction.

MUSA 2XX:
For second year Music majors or others with
prerequisite.

Prerequisite(s): Two semesters of lessons at the
100 level.

MUSA 3XX:
For third year Music majors or others with
prerequisite.

Prerequisite(s): Two semesters of lessons at the
200 level.

MUSA 4XX:
For fourth year Music majors or others with
prerequisite.

Prerequisite(s): Two semesters of lessons at the
300 level.

Lessons on additional instruments may be
available by request.
  • Private Voice Lessons MUSA 110, 111, 210,
       211, 310, 311, 410, 411.
  • Private Keyboard Lessons MUSA 120, 121,
       220, 221, 320, 321, 420, 421.
  • Private Flute Lessons MUSA 130, 131, 230,
       231, 330, 331, 430, 431.
  • Private Oboe Lessons MUSA 132, 133, 232,
       233, 332, 333, 432, 433.
  • Private Clarinet Lessons MUSA 134, 135,
       234, 235, 334, 335, 434, 435.
  • Private Bassoon Lessons MUSA 136, 137,
       236, 237, 336, 337, 436, 437.
  • Private Trumpet Lessons MUSA 140, 141,
       240, 241, 340, 341, 440, 441.
  • Private Horn Lessons MUSA 142, 143, 242,
       243, 342, 343, 442, 443.




                                               299
  •   Private Trombone/Euphonium Lessons
      MUSA 144, 145, 244, 245, 344, 345, 444,
      445.
  •   Private Tuba Lessons MUSA 146, 147, 246,
      247, 346, 347, 446, 447.
  •   Private Percussion Lessons MUSA 150,
      151, 250, 251, 350, 351, 450, 451.
  •   Private Violin Lessons MUSA 160, 161,
      260, 261, 360, 361, 460, 461.
  •   Private Viola Lessons MUSA 162, 163, 262,
      263, 362, 363, 462, 463.
  •   Private Cello Lessons MUSA 164, 165, 264,
      265, 364, 365, 464, 465.
  •   Private Bass Lessons MUSA 166, 167, 266,
      267, 366, 367, 466, 467.
  •   Private Guitar Lessons MUSA 170, 171,
      270, 271, 370, 371, 470, 471.
  •   Private Harp Lessons MUSA 172, 173, 272,
      273, 372, 373, 472, 473.

B. Performing Ensembles
Memberships in all performing ensembles is by
audition. Ensembles must be taken in numerical
sequence, the first being at the 100-level.
Ensembles rehearse for approximately three hours
each week of the semester for 1 semester hour of
credit.

Orchestra
MUSI 145, 146, 245, 246, 345, 346, 445, 446.
SAMC’s Orchestra is dedicated to the exploration
and sharing of the vast literature of symphonic
music, presented on and off-campus to the glory
of God. The core repertoire of this large ensemble
is the masterworks of the eighteenth through
twentieth centuries. In keeping with the School’s
spirit of collaboration, the Orchestra also
performs newly created works by SAMC faculty
and student composers. Membership in this
ensemble is open to students of all majors by
audition.

Concert Band
MUSI 147, 148, 247, 248, 347, 348, 447, 448.
SAMC’s Concert Band is dedicated to the
exploration and sharing of music for brass, winds,
and percussion, presented on and off-campus to
the glory of God. The repertoire for this ensemble
includes music originally composed for this
instrumentation, and arrangements of music from
the eighteenth century to the present. Membership
in this ensemble is open to students of all majors
by audition.

Chamber Choir
MUSI 153, 154, 253, 254, 353, 354, 453, 454.
The large vocal ensembles of the School of the
Arts, Media + Culture provide opportunity for
singers to develop vocal technique and music
literacy while learning choral repertoire from many
stylistic periods and traditions. The Chamber
Choir is the most advanced vocal ensemble at
TWU and has the most rigorous rehearsal and
performance schedule. This course develops
musical leadership by teaching ensemble-singing
skills, lyric diction, and expressive performance
techniques. The Chamber Choir regularly
represents the university in local performances as
well as on international tours. TWU’s large vocal
ensembles are open to students of all majors by
audition.

Vocal Ensembles
MUSI 161, 162, 261, 262, 361, 362, 461, 462.

Chamber Singers (Section A)
The small vocal ensembles of the School of the
Arts, Media + Culture provide opportunity for
singers to challenge themselves in more intimate
musical settings. Chamber Singers is an advanced
vocal group that tackles challenging contemporary
and classic works from the choral repertoire, often
accompanied by chamber orchestra, such as a
Bach cantata or a psalm setting. TWU’s small
vocal ensembles are open to students of all majors
by audition.

Worship Team (Section B)
Worship Team is a group of singers and
instrumentalists which develops music team skills
to perform and lead in worship. The team
represents TWU as they minister both on and off
campus. TWU’s small vocal ensembles are open
to students of all majors by audition.

Renaissance Singers (Section C)
The small vocal ensembles of the School of the
Arts, Media + Culture provide opportunity for
singers to challenge themselves in more intimate
musical settings. Renaissance Singers is an a
cappella ensemble dedicated to the polyphony of
the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. TWU’s small



                                                300
vocal ensembles are open to students of all majors
by audition.

Vocal Jazz Ensemble (Section D)
The small vocal ensembles of the School of the
Arts, Media + Culture provide opportunity for
singers to challenge themselves in more intimate
musical settings. Vocal Jazz is an ensemble that
performs a variety of traditional and
contemporary jazz arrangements on and off
campus. TWU’s small vocal ensembles are open
to students of all majors by audition.

Musical Theatre Vocal Ensemble (Section E)
The small vocal ensembles of the School of the
Arts, Media + Culture provide opportunity for
singers to challenge themselves in more intimate
musical settings. Musical Theatre Vocal is an
ensemble that takes part in the biannual SAMC
Musical. TWU’s small vocal ensembles are open
to students of all majors by audition.

Instrumental Ensembles
MUSI 165, 166, 265, 266, 365, 366, 465, 466.
The SAMC small instrumental ensembles provide
opportunity for instrumentalists to challenge
themselves in a more intimate musical settings,
presenting concerts on and off-campus to the
glory of God. TWU’s small instrumental
ensembles are open to students of all majors by
audition.

Brass Quintet (Section A) (trumpets, French horn,
trombone, and tuba) explores music from a
variety of genres including early polyphonic works
from the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries,
arrangements of Classical music from the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, and more
contemporary compositions from the twentieth
and twenty-first centuries.

Jazz Combo (Section B) (drum set, piano, bass,
guitar, brass, and wind instruments) explores the
rich literature of jazz music for smaller groups (5-8
players), including both standards and more recent
compositions. Students will gain experience
reading lead sheets and improvising.

Stage Band (Section C) (percussion, piano, bass,
brass, and winds) explores the rich literature of
jazz music from the Big Band era and more
contemporary works for this size of group (14-24
players). The charts for this ensemble are more
fully scored, but include some opportunity for
improvised solos.

String Quartet (Section D) (violins, viola, and cello)
explores the vast range of string chamber music
written from the early Classic through Modern
eras.

Woodwind Quintet (Section G) (flute, oboe, clarinet,
French horn, and bassoon) explores a wide variety
of music written for this ensemble from the
Classic through Modern eras. Their repertoire may
also include arrangements of music from other
ensembles or genres.

Traditional Jazz Ensemble (Section H) (drum set,
piano, bass, guitar/banjo, brass, and winds)
explores popular American music of the early
twentieth century with a focus on jazz standards
from the 1920s through 1940s.

Guitar Ensemble (Section I) (guitars) explores
arrangements and original compositions in a
variety of styles written for 4-6 players. Members
will explore works written in both traditional and
tab notation.

Music Theatre Ensemble (Section J) (varied
instrumentation) supports the SAMC collaborative
presentation of a music theatre show by providing
the musical accompaniment for the actors.

New Music Ensemble (Section K) (varied
instrumentation) explores classic contemporary
music from the twentieth and twenty-first
centuries, and also serves as a resident ensemble
performing works composed by current or recent
SAMC Music students.

Concert Choir
MUSI 181, 182, 281, 282, 381, 382, 481, 482.
The large vocal ensembles of the School of the
Arts, Media + Culture provide opportunity for
singers to develop vocal technique and music
literacy while learning choral repertoire from many
stylistic periods and traditions. The Concert Choir
is the introductory vocal ensemble at TWU and
most singers will spend a minimum of one
semester in Concert Choir before progressing to
the more advanced ensembles. This course
introduces ensemble-singing skills, lyric diction,


                                                    301
and expressive performance techniques. The
Concert Choir regularly takes part in major joint
performances with the other TWU choirs. TWU’s
large vocal ensembles are open to students of all
majors by audition.



Natural and Applied
Sciences
NATS 481 Christian Perspectives in the
Sciences: Life Sciences (3 sem. hrs.)
This is a liberal arts-oriented capstone course
concerning the integration of Christianity with the
Life Sciences and other disciplines taught within
the Faculty of Natural and Applied Sciences.
Christian beliefs are applied to an understanding
and evaluation of modern science and technology.
The course integrates elements of theology,
history and philosophy of science, and specific
topics where Christian faith and science intersect.
This course consists of three parts: general topics
in science, further explorations of topics in the
Life Sciences, and student-led seminars occurring
in interdisciplinary groups.

Prerequisite(s): Completion of at least 60 sem.
hrs. of study by end of preceding semester, and at
least 12 sem. hrs. of Biology, Biotechnology, or
Environmental Sciences courses.

NATS 482 Christian Perspectives in
the Sciences: Chemistry (3 sem. hrs.)
This is a liberal arts-oriented capstone course
concerning the integration of Christianity with
chemistry and other disciplines taught within the
Faculty of Natural and Applied Sciences. Christian
beliefs found in Scripture are applied to an
understanding and evaluation of modern science
and technology. The course integrates elements of
theology, history and philosophy of science, and
specific topics where Christian faith and science
intersect. This course consists of three parts:
general topics in science, further exploration of
topics for students within chemistry, and student-
led seminars in interdisciplinary groups.
Prerequisite(s): Completion of at least 60 sem.
hrs. of study by end of preceding semester, and at
least 12 sem. hrs. of Chemistry.

NATS 483 Christian Perspectives in
the Sciences: Computing Science (3
sem. hrs.)
This is a liberal arts-oriented capstone course
concerning the integration of Christianity with
computing science and other disciplines taught
within the Faculty of Natural and Applied
Sciences. Christian beliefs are applied to an
understanding and evaluation of modern science
and technology. The course integrates elements of
theology, history and philosophy of science, and
specific topics where Christian faith and science
intersect. This course consists of three parts:
general topics in science, further exploration of
topics for students within computing science, and
student-led seminars in interdisciplinary groups.

Prerequisite(s): Completion of at least 60 sem.
hrs. of study by end of preceding semester and at
least 12 sem. hrs. of Computing Science.

NATS 484 Christian Perspectives in
the Sciences: Mathematics (3 sem.
hrs.)
This is a liberal arts-oriented capstone course
concerning the integration of Christianity with
mathematics and other disciplines taught within
the Faculty of Natural and Applied Sciences.
Christian beliefs found in Scripture are applied to
an understanding and evaluation of modern
science and technology. The course integrates
elements of theology, history and philosophy of
science, and specific topics where Christian faith
and science intersect. This course consists of three
parts: general topics in science, further exploration
of topics for students within Chemistry, and
student-led seminars in interdisciplinary groups.

NB: Not offered every year.
Prerequisite(s): Completion of at least 60 sem.
hrs. of study by end of preceding semester and at
least 12 sem. hrs. of Mathematics.




                                                 302
Nursing
NURS 113 Clinical Skills I (2 sem. hrs.)
This course focuses on knowledge and laboratory
practice of clinical skills related to the basic
nursing care of individuals. Includes introduction
to nursing process and basic nursing concepts.

NB: Pass/Fail course.
Co-requisites(s): NURS 114.
Prerequisite(s): Admission to the BSN program.
(0-4; 0-0)

NURS 114 Introduction to the
Profession of Nursing (3 sem. hrs.)
This course introduces students to the
foundational knowledge, skills, reasoning, and
values required to embody the professional
identity of a nurse in the provision of
collaborative, safe, competent, ethical,
compassionate and evidence-informed person-
centered care.

Co-requisites(s): NURS 113.
Prerequisite(s): Admission to the BSN program.
(3-0; 0-0)

NURS 123 Clinical Skills II (2 sem.
hrs.)
This course builds on knowledge and laboratory
practice of clinical skills related to the basic
nursing care of individuals. It focuses on
knowledge, clinical and health assessment skills,
including biological, psychological, social, and
spiritual dimensions of health. It emphasizes
techniques to gather health related data, including
taking a health history and performing a physical
examination, with the purpose of identifying
patient care needs and formulating a plan of care.

NB: Pass/Fail course.
Prerequisite(s): Successful completion of first
semester of BSN program. (0-0; 0-4)

NURS 124 Communication and
Covenantal Caring (2 sem. hrs.)
Concepts of communication and collaboration are
explored with an emphasis on the skills and
competencies nurses require to build strong
interpersonal relationships with patients,
interprofessional teams, and colleagues.
Covenantal caring as foundational to interpersonal
relationships and the influence of Christian values
and beliefs are explored.

Prerequisite(s): NURS 113, 114. (0-0; 2-0)
NURS 127 Health Promotion and
Primary Health Care (3 sem. hrs.)
This course introduces broad concepts of health
promotion as a process of enabling people to
increase control over, and to improve, their health.
It introduces a range of social and environmental
interventions used in promotion and protection of
health, harm reduction, and prevention of disease.
It introduces experiential learning and health
teaching related to wellness and healthy living.

Prerequisite(s): 100 level nursing courses and
other non-nursing prerequisites designated on
curricular pattern. (0-0; 2-4)

NURS 200 Nursing Therapeutics I (3
sem. hrs.)
This course introduces nursing therapeutics as
interventions by the nurse in the care of well and
ill persons. Emphasis is on nutritional and
pharmacological interventions and related
education in the context of care of adults and
older adults.

Prerequisite(s): 100 level nursing courses and
other non-nursing prerequisites designated on
curricular pattern. (3-0; 0-0)

NURS 212 Nursing Care of Older
Adults (3 sem. hrs.)
This course focuses on nursing care of older
adults from a positive aging perspective.
Emphasis is on the nursing process considering
physiological, psychological, social, and spiritual
dimensions of health, well-being, and common
chronic conditions.

Co-requisite(s): NURS 213.
Prerequisite(s): 100 level nursing courses and
other non-nursing prerequisites designated on
curricular pattern. (0-0, 3-0)




                                                  303
NURS 213 Clinical Practice: Adult
Health I (3 sem. hrs.)
This course focuses on experiential learning of
nursing care for older adults and takes place in
older adult care agencies and in the nursing SIM
laboratory. Emphasis is on the development of
clinical reasoning through the delivery of safe,
client-centered and evidence-informed healthcare.
Using the nursing process framework (assessment,
planning, implementing, evaluating), students will
engage with older adult residents and the health
care team, assess older adult patients’ care,
comfort, and personal needs, identify the
appropriate nursing response, choose applicable
tools and resources to provide collaborative care,
assess and report outcomes. Students will have the
opportunity to develop self-insight through
reflection-on-practice as they experientially
process the role of the gerontological nurse in
direct care and consider equity concerns.

NB: Pass/Fail course.
Co-requisites: NURS 212.
Prerequisite(s): 100 level nursing courses and
other non-nursing prerequisites designated on
curricular pattern. (0-0, 0-8)

NURS 224 Evidence-Informed
Practice (3 sem. hrs.)
This course introduces concepts of evidence-
informed nursing practice and its alignment with
professional standards. Students develop research
literacy skills to critically appraise research
evidence across select methods. Related attitudes
of inquiry, such as open-mindedness and curiosity,
are emphasized.

Co-requisite(s): MATH 108.
Prerequisite(s): 100 level nursing courses and
other non-nursing prerequisites designated on
curricular pattern. (0-0; 3-0)

NURS 227 Global Health,
Humanitarian and Christian Missions
(3 sem. hrs.)
This course focuses on global health, planetary
health, health equity, humanitarianism, and
Christian missions, with implications for nursing
and intersectoral care. Emphasis is on exploring
past and current global health topics, such as
global burden of disease, health systems
strengthening, public and health policy, human
rights, indigenous health, infectious diseases, and
global disasters.

Prerequisite(s): NURS 100 level courses and
other non-nursing prerequisites designated on
curricular pattern. Permission to participate in this
course may be granted on an individual basis for
students from other disciplines or educational
institutions. (0-0; 0-3)

NURS 230 History of Nursing (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course examines the development of
Canadian nursing over the past four centuries,
with an emphasis on the twentieth century. Based
on an understanding of nursing as rooted in a
Christian ethos of caring for strangers, this course
critically explores the ways in which religion,
politics, gender, race, economics, technology,
culture, war, and epidemics have influenced the
development of nursing both nationally and
globally.

NB: This course is an elective and is not offered
every year.
Cross-listed: HIST 230.
Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0; 3-0)

NURS 232 Nursing Care of Adults (3
sem. hrs.)
This course focuses on nursing care of adults
experiencing acute, chronic, and palliative
conditions in hospital and community-based
settings. Emphasis is placed on the nursing
process considering physiological, psychological,
social, and spiritual responses to illness and health.

Co-requisite(s): NURS 233.
Prerequisite(s): 100 level nursing courses and
other non-Nursing prerequisites designated on
curricular pattern. (3-0; 0-0)

NURS 233 Clinical Practice: Adult
Health II (4 sem. hrs.)
This course focuses on experiential learning in the
provision of nursing care for adults with acute and
chronic illnesses. Emphasis is on the delivery of
safe, person-centered and evidence informed
health care to adult clients in diverse settings.
Clinical reasoning is emphasized in assessment,


                                                  304
planning, implementation, and evaluation of
nursing care.

NB: Pass/Fail course.
Co-requisite(s): NURS 232.
Prerequisite(s): 100 level nursing courses and
other non-nursing prerequisites designated on
curricular pattern (0-0; 3-0)

NURS 300 Nursing Therapeutics II (3
sem. hrs.)
This course evaluates, applies, and integrates
principles of nursing therapeutics as single or
multiple interventions by the nurse in the care of
well and ill persons. Emphasis is on nutritional
and pharmacological interventions and related
education in the context of care of mental health,
childbearing families, and children.

Prerequisite(s): 100 and 200 level nursing
courses and other non-nursing prerequisites
designated on curricular pattern. (3-0; 0-0)

NURS 312 Nursing Care and Mental
Health (3 sem. hrs.)
This course focuses on nursing care as related to
mental health throughout the life cycle in a variety
of settings. Emphasis is placed on the nursing
process considering psychological, emotional,
social, and spiritual responses to mental illness and
the promotion and restoration of mental health.

Co-requisite(s): NURS 313.
Prerequisite(s): 100 and 200 level nursing
courses and other non-nursing prerequisites
designated on curricular pattern. (3-0; 0-0)

NURS 313 Clinical Practice: Mental
Health (3 sem. hrs.)
This course focuses on experiential learning in the
provision of nursing care for clients with common
acute and chronic mental health conditions.
Emphasis is on the delivery of safe, person-
centered, and evidence-informed health care to
clients in diverse settings. Clinical reasoning is
emphasized in assessment, planning,
implementation, and evaluation of nursing care.

NB: Pass/Fail course.
Co-requisite(s): NURS 312.
Prerequisite(s): 100 and 200 level nursing
courses and other non-nursing prerequisites
designated on curricular pattern. (0-9; 0-0)

NURS 317 Community Health (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course focuses on principles of community
health nursing to ameliorate structural
vulnerabilities and health disparities through
population health strategies, community
assessment and development, communicable
disease control, intersectional care, advocacy, and
health policy.

Co-requisite(s): NURS 318.
Prerequisite(s): NURS 100, 200 level courses
and other non-nursing prerequisites designated on
curricular pattern. (3-0; 0-0)

NURS 318 Clinical Practice:
Community Health (3 sem. hrs.)
This course focuses on experiential learning in
community. Emphasis is on collaborative
assessment, planning, implementation, and
evaluation of health care within diverse
community settings.

NB: Pass/Fail course.
Co-requisite(s): NURS 317.
Prerequisite(s): NURS 100, 200 level courses
and other non-nursing prerequisites designated on
curricular pattern (0-9; 0-0)

NURS 322 Nursing Care of
Childbearing Families (3 sem. hrs.)
Concepts of nursing care are related to the health
care of women, newborns, children, and families
during the childbearing years.

Co-requisite(s): NURS 323.
Prerequisite(s): 100, 200 level courses and other
non-nursing prerequisites designated on curricular
pattern. (0-0; 3-0)

NURS 323 Clinical Practice: Family
Health I (3 sem. hrs.)
This course focuses on experiential learning in the
provision of nursing care for childbearing families.
Emphasis is on the delivery of safe, client-centred,
and evidence-informed healthcare to women,



                                                  305
newborns, and their families during the
childbearing years. Clinical reasoning is
emphasized in assessment, planning and
implementation and evaluation of nursing care.

Co-requisite(s): NURS 322.
Prerequisite(s): 100, 200 level nursing courses;
and other non-nursing prerequisites designated on
curricular pattern (0-0; 0-9)

NURS 342 Nursing Care of Children
and Families (3 sem. hrs.)
Concepts of nursing care are related to families
managing acute and chronic conditions in home
and hospital settings. Nursing process, family
theory, child health, family health, and family-
centred care principles are related to care to
emphasize health promotion and health
maintenance activities.

Co-requisite(s): NURS 343.
Prerequisite(s): 100, 200 level nursing courses;
and other non-nursing prerequisites designated on
curricular pattern. (0-0; 3-0)

NURS 343 Clinical Practice: Family
Health II (3 sem. hrs.)
This course focuses on experiential learning in the
provision of nursing care of children and their
families. Emphasis is on the delivery of safe,
client-centred, and evidence-informed healthcare
to children and their families in diverse settings.
Clinical reasoning is emphasized in assessment,
planning, implementation, and evaluation of
nursing care.

Co-requisite(s): NURS 342.
Prerequisite(s): NURS 100 and 200 level
courses, and other non-nursing prerequisites
designated on curricular pattern. (0-0; 0-9).

NURS 350 Spirituality and the Helping
Professions (3 sem. hrs.)
In response to Canada’s diverse society, this
course provides the student opportunities to
explore how religious, spiritual, and theological
perspectives shape experiences of health, illness,
and human suffering, with applications to spiritual
caregiving and self-care practices of the helping
professional.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of Religious Studies
courses; Second year standing in Nursing.

NURS 360 Person-Centred Palliative
Approach (3 sem. hrs.)
Focus is on how to provide a person-centred
palliative approach to care for a growing
population of individuals who have progressive
life-limiting conditions, and their family caregivers.

Prerequisite(s): NURS 100, 200 level courses
and other non-nursing prerequisites designated on
curricular pattern (0-0; 3-0)

NURS 400, 401 Directed Studies in
Nursing (1-3 sem. hrs.)
Admission to a directed studies course is at the
sole discretion of the Dean. These courses may be
used for remediation or to develop a specific area
of student interest.

NURS 412 Nursing Care of Adults with
Complex Illness (3 sem. hrs.)
Concepts of nursing care are examined as they
relate to the complex care needs of adults
recovering from surgical procedures, as well as the
needs of their families. Complex care refers to
consideration of factors that influence wellness in
the midst of illness, facilitate an understanding of
related pathophysiology, and promote an
awareness of cultural and other influences in
health care.

Co-requisite(s): NURS 413.
Prerequisite(s): NURS 100, 200, 300 level
courses and other non-nursing prerequisites
designated on curricular pattern. (3-0; 0-0)

NURS 413 Clinical Practice: Adult III
(4 sem. hrs.)
This course focuses on experiential learning in the
provision of nursing care for adults with complex
acute and chronic illnesses who are recovering
from surgical procedures. Emphasis is on the
delivery of safe, client-centred, and evidence-
informed health care to adult clients. Clinical
reasoning is emphasized in assessment, planning,
implementation, and evaluation of nursing care.

NB: Pass/Fail course



                                                  306
Co-requisite(s): NURS 412.
Prerequisite(s): NURS 100, 200, 300 level
courses and other non-nursing prerequisites
designated on curricular pattern. (0-12; 0-0)

NURS 424 Professional Ethics (3 sem.
hrs.)
Key elements of professional nursing practice are
explored through reading and discussion and
applied in the development of a personal
professional practice model. These key elements
include theoretical and theological foundations of
nursing, application of relevant theory to practice,
critical analysis of pertinent nursing issues, ethical
thinking and decision making, therapeutic
relational aspects of client care, and responsible
communication with clients, colleagues, and the
public.

Prerequisite(s): NURS 100, 200, 300 level
courses and other non-nursing prerequisites
designated on curricular pattern. (0-0; 3-0)

NURS 434 Leadership in Nursing Care
(3 sem. hrs.)
Key concepts and processes of leadership are
explored as they apply to nursing and health care.
Students have the opportunity to examine and
develop leadership skills required in contemporary
nursing practice. Exercises promote the
development and application of values and
philosophies of nursing leaders within a Christian
worldview.

Prerequisite(s): 100, 200, 300 level nursing
courses and other non-nursing prerequisites
designated on curricular pattern. (0-0; 3-0)

NURS 443 Clinical Practice:
Consolidation (6 sem. hrs.)
Concepts of nursing care are applied to the
provision of acute, rehabilitative, or palliative
nursing care and health promotion in acute or
community placements.

NB: Pass/Fail course.
Prerequisite(s): NURS 100, 200, 300 level
courses and other non-nursing prerequisites
designated on curricular pattern. (0-0; 0-30)
Nursing, Graduate
Courses
NB: The following courses are part of the Master of
Science in Nursing Graduate Program. For further
information about courses see the School of Graduate
Studies section or contact the M.S.N. Graduate Program
director.

NURS 510 Foundations of Nursing
Knowledge (3 sem. hrs.)
An exploration of the historical and current trends
in nursing theory and philosophy. Students
explore the role of models, meta-paradigms,
concept analyses and middle range theories in
relation to traditional and emerging views of
science. Issues and controversies within nursing
philosophy are introduced with emphasis on
understanding the relevance of these debates for
both the health care system and the discipline of
nursing.

NB: This course is offered in summer.
Prerequisite(s): Undergraduate nursing research
course or equivalent.

NURS 520 Knowledge Synthesis (3
sem. hrs.)
This course addresses the principles of knowledge
synthesis as the basis for informing nursing theory
and practice. Students broaden their
understanding of different kinds of evidence while
learning the skills of locating, coding, synthesizing,
and applying evidence from research studies.
Students learn to draw on Christian values and
principles to critically reflect on the implications
of evidence-based knowledge for theory and
practice.

NB: This course is offered in summer.
Prerequisite(s): Undergraduate nursing research
course or equivalent.

NURS 530 Nursing Inquiry I (3 sem.
hrs.)
An entry-level course in understanding the
philosophical foundations of nursing inquiry and
evidence with a focus on qualitative methods.



                                                      307
Students explore the inquiry process in the
context of the following methods:
phenomenology, grounded theory, ethnography,
critical inquiry, narrative analysis, historical and
philosophic inquiry. The processes of data
collection, analysis, and interpretation are
examined. Attention is given to Christian values
and principles in relation to research ethics and
the applicability of research findings to the various
contexts of nursing practice.

Prerequisite(s): NURS 510, 520. (3-0; 0-0)

NURS 540 Nursing Inquiry II (4 sem.
hrs.)
This course addresses principles of nursing inquiry
and evidence with a focus on quantitative design
and statistical literacy. Students will broaden their
understanding of quantitative research methods
and enhance their ability to analyze quantitative
data and interpret statistical results for answering
research questions of relevance to nursing theory
and practice.

Prerequisite(s): Undergraduate nursing research
course or equivalent; introductory course on
statistics; first year M.S.N. courses as designated
on curricular plan. (0-0; 4-0)

NURS 550 Health Care Policy (3 sem.
hrs.)
A broad overview of the policy process and its
application to health care. Reflecting on Canadian
priorities, concerns, and obligations, health care
issues are analyzed with a specific focus on policy,
politics, and influence. The roles of nursing and
nurse leaders in health policy development,
implementation, and advocacy for the health and
social needs of the public are critically evaluated.
A required on-site residency at the Laurentian
Leadership Centre in Ottawa exposes students to
the key people and process of health care policy at
federal and international levels. International
policy, through WHO and other agencies, is
examined for its relationship to federal policy and
for global perspectives on health and nursing.

Prerequisite(s): NURS 510. (0-0; 3-0)

NURS 607 Nursing Topics (3 sem.
hrs.)
This graduate course critically examines issues
related to nursing knowledge and advanced
professional practice. Topics may vary, depending
on student interest and professor availability.
Sample topics include Issues in Nursing History,
and Issues in International Nursing.

Prerequisite(s): Eligible for admission to Master
of Science in Nursing program.

NURS 611 Perspectives on Nursing
Education (3 sem. hrs.)
An overview to the history, theory, research,
ethics, and issues shaping nursing leadership in
Canada and international health communities.
Utilizing thoughtful Christian perspectives,
students critically explore the history of leadership
in health care, and the sociopolitical context in
which it operates, and the attributes of morally
good leaders, analyze current and future issues
affecting health care leadership, and apply the role
of nursing leadership to that context.

Prerequisite(s): First year M.S.N. courses as per
curricular plan. (0-0; 3-0)

NURS 612 Learning/Teaching in
Nurse Education (3 sem. hrs.)
A practical focus on the competencies required to
facilitate learning in nursing education. Students
explore pedagogical concepts and techniques in
classroom and clinical contexts including
constructing syllabi, lesson plans, clinical learning
experiences and evaluative measures, with
attention to Christian perspectives.

Prerequisite(s): First year M.S.N. courses as per
curricular plan; NURS 611. (0-0; 3-0)

NURS 621 Perspectives on Nursing
Leadership (3 sem. hrs.)
An overview to the theory, research, and issues
shaping nursing leadership in Canada and
international health communities. Students will
explore the history of leadership in health care,
and the sociopolitical context in which it operates;
analyze current and future issues affecting health
care leadership, and apply the role of nursing
leadership to that context. Nurses who bring
disciplinary nursing knowledge about health
promotion, patient responses to illness, inter-


                                                  308
personal and inter-professional communication,
population health, and the social contexts of
health and illness together with emerging
knowledge regarding health care organizations and
leadership theory are in a unique position to
provide highly effective leadership to today’s
changing, complex healthcare environments.

Prerequisite(s): First year M.S.N. courses as per
curricular plan. (0-0; 3-0)

NURS 622 The Skills of Nursing
Leadership (3 sem. hrs.)
A practical focus on the competencies required
for nursing leadership. Students have the
opportunity to develop leadership skills necessary
for today’s complex healthcare environments,
which take into account Christian values and
principles. Building on their existing practice
expertise, students explore ways to innovatively
incorporate emerging research, theory, and
practice concepts into a particular field of
healthcare leadership practice, including (but not
limited to) health care administration and
operational management. Emphasis is placed on
concepts such as values clarification, engagement
and relationship building, patient advocacy, inter-
professional communication and team building,
quality improvement, and the ethics of leadership.

Prerequisite(s): First year M.S.N. courses as per
curricular plan; NURS 621. (3-0; 0-0)

NURS 631: ANP I: Perspectives on
Advanced Nursing Practice
(Gerontology) (3 sem. hrs.)
An overview to the history, research, ethics, and
issues affecting advanced nursing practice in
Canada and internationally. Attention is paid to
Christian values and principles as students explore
the history of advanced nursing practice and the
inter-professional and sociopolitical contexts in
which it operates. The interrelated domains of
advanced nursing practice (ANP), consultation,
education, research, and leadership are explored in
the context of older adult care, as well as ANP
roles such as clinical nurse specialist, clinician, and
professional practice leader. Attention is given to
the moral issues surrounding aging, including end-
of-life issues.
Prerequisite(s): First year M.S.N. courses as per
curricular plan. (0-0; 3-0)

NURS 632: ANP II: Themes in Care
(Gerontology) (3 sem. hrs.)
An advanced practice course with a specialty focus
on older adult nursing care across the spectrum of
health and illness. Students develop expertise
about role of nurses in the contexts of primary
care, home care, parish nursing, long-term care,
and palliative-hospice care. Utilizing faith-based
perspectives, fundamental concepts pertaining to
primary health care, chronic disease management,
and the supportive needs of older adults and their
families are emphasized.

Prerequisite(s): First year M.S.N. courses as per
curricular plan; NURS 631. (0-0; 3-0)

NURS 633 Health Care Ethics and
Decision Making (3 sem. hrs.)
This course provides students with a solid
framework for addressing ethical issues and ethical
decision making. Through a contextualized
approach that draws on a variety of ethical
theories, learners in this course critically analyze a
range of issues facing leaders in healthcare
settings, including micro or individual level
decisions (e.g., treatment withdrawal) to meso or
organizational level questions (e.g., resource
allocation pertaining to organ donation or
restructuring decisions), to macro or social level
issues (e.g., public health policy that focuses on
prevention rather than treatment, or the challenge
of conflicting worldviews in a pluralistic society).
Exploration of moral leadership and the processes
of ethical decision-making includes Christian
principles, personal values, and professional
obligations. Resources such as the profession’s
code of ethics and moral policy-making
statements are utilized in addition to ethical
theories.

Prerequisite(s): NURS 510. (3-0; 0-0)

NURS 690 MSN Thesis I (3 sem. hrs.)
The thesis provides an opportunity for the student
to conduct independent nursing research in an
area of interest. The process of research—from
identification of problem for investigation,



                                                  309
research design, data collection and analysis, to
written report of findings—is the focus.

Prerequisite(s): All first year M.S.N. courses as
per curricular plan.

NURS 691 MSN Thesis II (3 sem. hrs.)
The thesis provides an opportunity for the student
to conduct independent nursing research in an
area of interest. The process of research—from
identification of problem for investigation,
research design, data collection and analysis, to
written report of findings—is the focus.

Prerequisite(s): All first year M.S.N. courses as
per curricular plan.

NURS 692 Knowledge Translation
Project I (3 sem. hrs.)
A synthesis of research, theory, and practice
within the student’s stream, substantive area of
focus, and particular practice setting. Students
work alongside a mentor in practice (e.g.,
education, administration, or advanced practice
with the older adult) to design, implement, and
evaluate a knowledge translation project that will
be of service to the healthcare community (either
practice or education).

Prerequisite(s): All first year M.S.N. courses as
per curricular plan.

NURS 693 Knowledge Translation
Project II (3 sem. hrs.)
A synthesis of research, theory, and practice
within the student’s’ stream, substantive area of
focus, and particular practice setting. Students
work alongside a mentor in practice (e.g.,
education, administration, or advanced practice
with the older adult) to design, implement and
evaluate a knowledge translation project that will
be of service to the healthcare community (either
practice or education).

Prerequisite(s): All first year M.S.N. courses as
per curricular plan.

NURS 695 MSN Thesis Continuation
Status (0 sem. hrs.)
Nursing, Doctoral
Courses
NURS 700 Doctoral Seminars (0.5 sem.
hrs. over 6 semesters)
This seminar guides students in exploring topics
related to nursing education leadership,
development of advanced professional
competencies, and their dissertation research. The
online seminar will include presentations of
ongoing and proposed research by students and
faculty, the creation of a professional dossier, and
preparation for the comprehensive exam. As
students develop their dissertation proposal, they
may use the doctoral seminar to test their
emerging ideas and obtain feedback from peers
and faculty. Students participate in this online
seminar until they successfully complete their
comprehensive exams. (Years 1 and 2.)

NURS 710 Advanced Nursing
Philosophy (3 sem. hrs.)
In this hybrid course, doctoral students will learn
how various philosophic traditions inform nursing
knowledge development, practice, and education.
Nursing science, the disciplinary and
interdisciplinary knowledges that form the
foundation of nursing, is examined. Emphasis is
on the process of philosophic inquiry and the
ability to analyze systematically and logically the
contemporary issues facing health services, the
nursing profession, and nursing education.
Philosophic foundations are laid from which
students develop as scholars in their contribution
to the nursing profession.

NURS 720 Advanced Research
Methodology (3 sem. hrs.)
Doctoral students will learn how to conceptualize
nursing research methodology, with an emphasis
on the foundations of nursing inquiry, the
assumptions and claims underpinning the research
enterprise, the philosophy of evidence, and
justifications of how research questions and
approaches articulate with socially and clinically
relevant problems requiring investigation.




                                                 310
Prerequisite(s): Graduate level courses in
qualitative methods and quantitative methods.

NURS 730 Advanced Research Design
(3 sem. hrs.)
Based on research methodologies, this course
provides the critical foundations of advanced
research approaches to formulate procedures for
inquiry (research designs) and detailed research
methods of data collection, analysis, and
interpretation (research methods). The
implications of research decisions will be
differentiated. Students obtain the in-depth
knowledge and skills required to independently
conduct research with an emphasis on the new
and emerging approaches of nursing research.
Critical examination of theories employed in the
nursing discipline, research questions, designs, the
positionality of the researcher, rigour, and ethics
will be discussed.

Prerequisite(s): Graduate level courses in
qualitative methods and quantitative methods.

NURS 750 Advanced Public Policy &
Knowledge Translation (3 sem. hrs.)
Doctoral students will learn how to affect health
system and educational change through public
policy and knowledge translation. The
philosophical, theoretical foundations and multi-
faceted strategies of public policy (including health
policy and educational policy) and knowledge
translation are examined during a residency at the
world-class Laurentian Leadership Centre in
Ottawa. The student will apply knowledge
translation concepts to their dissertation research
plans.

Prerequisite(s): A graduate level course in
knowledge translation, health policy, or leadership.

NURS 760 Advanced Educational
Leadership (3 sem. hrs.)
Doctoral students will learn how to provide
leadership to nursing education, drawing on
higher education and leadership theories to
analyze the sociopolitical context of nursing
education. Particular attention is given to
understanding the trifold role of the nursing
professoriate of teaching, research, and service;
and the management of learning environments.
Prerequisite(s): A graduate level course in
nursing education or nursing leadership or
Advanced Nursing Practice.

NURS 800 Dissertation Seminar (0.5
sem. hrs. over 6 semesters)
This seminar deals with theoretical and practical
aspects of designing dissertation research through
to the successful completion of the dissertation.
Topics pertaining to access and recruitment of
study participants, data collection, data analysis,
and knowledge translation will be addressed.
Doctoral students will engage with classmates and
faculty on this online seminar once they have
completed their comprehensive exams. (Year 3
and 4.)

Prerequisite(s): NURS 700.

NUR 833 Internship (3 sem. hrs.)
Doctoral students will complete an internship
(approximately 100 hours) in mentorship with an
expert nurse scholar-educator, researcher, policy
analyst or leader. In conjunction with a faculty
mentor, students will design and complete a
project that is individualized to their learning
needs and builds the professional skills of a nurse
academician.

Prerequisite(s): First year of PhD Nursing
Courses.

NURS 900 Dissertation Proposal (3
sem. hrs. per term. 9 sem. hrs. total)
Doctoral students will design independent
research, with the supervision of a committee with
relevant substantive and methodological expertise.

Prerequisite(s): Comprehensive exam and all
core courses.

NURS 910 Dissertation Continuation
(3 sem. hrs. per term. 12 semester
hours total)
Doctoral students will conduct independent
research, with the supervision of a committee with
relevant substantive and methodological expertise.

Prerequisite(s): NURS 900.




                                                311
NURS 945 Dissertation Extension (0
sem. hrs.)
Doctoral students will design and conduct
independent research, with the supervision of a
committee with relevant substantive and
methodological expertise. (Dissertation extension.)

Prerequisite(s): NURS 910.



Philosophy
PHIL 100 Philosophy for Life (3 sem.
hrs.)
Explores philosophy as a way of life accessible to
all, in order to think more truthfully, act more
justly, and live more faithfully. This course focuses
on critical thinking as an invaluable ethical tool for
interpreting current events. Students will learn to
analyze and evaluate the claims of contemporary
culture and religious faith.

Prerequisite(s): None. (3, 0)

PHIL 103 Introduction to Logic (3
sem. hrs.)
An analysis of the use of reasoning in ordinary
language. Students are introduced to deductive
logic by learning how to recognize arguments by
identifying some common fallacies and by learning
several methods of assessing the quality of
arguments. Both traditional and modern methods
of determining deductive validity, including a
formal theory of inference, are studied. In the
process, students will apply logical reasoning to
their own ideas and assumptions.

Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0 or 3-0)

PHIL 105 Introduction to Philosophy
(3 sem. hrs.)
This course introduces some of the major
questions about existence and what it is to be
human while providing some of the foundational
philosophical responses to these questions. Topics
to be discussed include: the relation between
perception and knowledge (appearance and
reality); the existence and nature of God; human
freedom and determinism; the meaning of human
existence; the nature of moral judgments; the
mind-body problem; artificial intelligence; feminist
philosophy; the problem of suffering; and whether
humans are capable of selfless motivation.
Students will be encouraged to interpret and
reflect upon the meaning of the relation between
reason and faith as the joint foundation for
addressing these questions in a logical and ethical
manner.

Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0; 3-0)

PHIL 106 Introduction to Philosophy
II (3 sem. hrs.)
An historical overview of the western
philosophical tradition from Socrates to the
present day. Considerable discussion will be
devoted to the distinct approaches of ancient,
medieval, and modern thinkers to the relation
between reason and faith. Additionally, there will
be extensive attention devoted to the history of
logical and ethical reasoning as we evaluate the
impact of these ideas on the present day.
Throughout the course, students will be
encouraged not only to analyze but also interpret
these ideas in a respectful yet critical manner.

Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0; 3-0)

PHIL 108 Philosophy of Society and
Law (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to the philosophy of society and
law in Canada and around the world. In this
exploration of the relation between society and
the law, the first half of the course begins with an
historic survey of the debates over the meaning of
the law from antiquity to the present. The second
half of the course reviews legal cases which have
provoked, or are still provoking, debates over the
meaning of law and society.

Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0 or 3-0)

PHIL 109 Critical Thinking: Informal
Logic (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to critical thinking/writing and
informal logic in practical settings. This course
examines the value of rational thinking in the face
of everyday challenges, e.g., problem solving,
making informed decisions, and evaluating
whether a statement is true. Students dissect


                                                312
examples of good and poor reasoning, analyze
informal fallacies, detect hidden assumptions and
irrelevant premises in arguments, determine where
an argument’s burden of proof lies, and practice
transferring critical thinking skills to their writing
skills. Socratic method and Socratic dialogue is
employed as a tool to assist students with their
inquiry-based learning.

Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0 or 3-0)

PHIL 111 History of Western
Philosophy: Ancient and Medieval
Period (3 sem. hrs.)
A survey of the teachings of the great
philosophers of the West, from the discovery of
physics by the Pre-Socratics, to the culmination of
medieval Scholasticism (i.e., in John of St.
Thomas), with a special emphasis on
developments in the philosophy of religion.

NB: Course taught at Catholic Pacific College, an
approved TWU learning centre.
Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0; 0-0)

PHIL 203 Ancient Greek Wisdom (3
sem. hrs.)
An examination of key contributions to Greek
philosophy, especially the writings of Plato and
Aristotle. In the process of dialoguing about these
ideas, we shall also study the importance of
ancient Greek philosophy in the history of
thought as well as the original intent of the
philosophers in question with attention to their
historic context. We shall also assess the enduring
relevance of ancient Greek philosophy to the
modern age.

Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0 or 3-0)

PHIL 210 Contemporary Ethical
Issues (3 sem. hrs.)
Through readings and class-discussion, this course
introduces students to the foundational moral
frameworks of western civilization and requires
them to bring these frameworks to bear on some
of the most important ethical issues arising in
contemporary society: consumerism,
technoculture, environmental ethics, responsibility
to distant peoples, genetic engineering and
cloning, and the promise and peril of
nanotechnology.

Prerequisite(s): Second year standing or
instructor’s consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

PHIL 220 Philosophy of Sex and
Gender (3 sem. hrs.)
This course explores questions such as: What is
feminism? What are the main schools of feminist
thought? What is patriarchy? What is gender and
does it differ from sex? Are there only two sexes?
Are there only two genders? What is
homosexuality? What are the different views on
how same-sex attraction arises? Do feminism and
Christianity have convergent trajectories? Is there
a place in the church for those from the LGBTQ
community? What are the cultural forces that
format the thinking about these questions?

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): Second year standing.

PHIL 231 Environmental Philosophy
(3 sem. hrs.)
An overview of the various perspectives put
forward in the West on the proper human
relationship to the environment. We will
investigate the metaphysics behind the fact/value
dichotomy, the currently influential views on the
human‐nature relationship, various environmental
ethical frameworks, the distinctive characteristics
of moral reasoning and argumentation as they
bear on the human‐nature relationship, and the
religious, economic, socio‐cultural, and ideological
factors contributory to the rise of the ecological
crisis. We conclude by critically interrogating the
conceptual substructures of some popular
contemporary environmental frameworks.

Cross-listed: GENV 231.
Prerequisite(s): None.

PHIL 303 Medieval Philosophy (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course explores philosophical issues in the
West from the second to the fourteenth century,
in particular the impact of Greek philosophy on
the development of Christian thought. There are
three natural stages of this interaction: 1)
Defensive philosophy (apologetics): responses to


                                                313
rational objections brought to bear against
Christianity; 2) Methodology: reflection on the
interaction between faith and reason, and, in
particular, the nature of theology as a science; and
3) Constructive philosophy: struggles from within
over a systematic metaphysics and ethics. A
central theme of the course is the role of the
doctrine of creation in the image of God.

NB: May not be offered every year. Course taught
at Catholic Pacific College, an approved TWU
learning centre.
Prerequisite(s): 3 sem. hrs. of philosophy. (3-0;
0-0)

PHIL 304 Philosophy of St. Thomas
Aquinas (3 sem. hrs.)
This course studies key texts from Thomas
Aquinas. The focus is on the Summa Theologiae
of Thomas Aquinas, but special attention is paid
to his commentaries on Aristotle and on his
Christian interpretation of ancient philosophy.
The challenge that modern science and modern
philosophy presents to Thomistic metaphysics is
also discussed, with special attention paid to the
highly influential critique made by Immanuel
Kant.

NB: Course taught at Catholic Pacific College, an
approved TWU learning centre.
Prerequisite(s): 3 sem. hrs. of philosophy. (3-0;
0-0)

PHIL 305 Philosophy of the Human
Person (3 sem. hrs.)
This course addresses what it means to say that
human beings are persons having freedom and
subjectivity; examines the different powers of the
human person, including the powers of
understanding, willing, feeling, and loving; studies
the difference between body and soul, as well as
the unity of the two in humans; and explores the
question of the immortality of the soul. Some
classic texts from the tradition of Western
philosophy are read.

NB: Course taught at Catholic Pacific College, an
approved TWU learning centre.
Prerequisite(s): 3 sem. hrs. of philosophy. (3-0;
0-0)
PHIL 310 Issues in Social Justice (3
sem. hrs.)
An examination of ethical issues that pertain to
social justice, addressing such topics as the
distribution of wealth, the difference between
equality and equity, the effects of globalization,
and the morality of war.

Cross-listed: POLS 310.
Prerequisite(s): 3 sem. hrs. of philosophy or
political studies, or third year standing. (3-0 or 3-0)

PHIL 313 British Empiricism (3 sem.
hrs.)
A study of empiricist philosophy in the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries. Selected writings of
Hobbes, Locke, Berkeley, and Hume are analyzed
and interpreted. As we discuss each author’s ideas,
we will evaluate their positions on the limits of
knowledge and experience, the intelligibility of
revelatory truth, the existence of God, the
divisibility of reality, the role of nature, and the
ethics and politics of human life.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of philosophy. (3-0
or 3-0)

PHIL 314 Reason and the
Enlightenment (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of rationalist philosophy in the European
Enlightenment period of the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries. Selected writings of
Descartes, Spinoza, and Leibniz are analyzed and
interpreted. As we discuss each author’s ideas, we
will evaluate their positions on the limits of
reason, the intelligibility of revelatory truth, the
existence of God, the divisibility of reality, the role
of nature, and the ethics and politics of human
life. In the process of dialoguing about these ideas,
we shall also study the historical importance of the
Enlightenment in modernity as well as the original
intent of the philosophers in question with
attention to their historic context. We shall also
assess the enduring relevance of the
Enlightenment to the modern age.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of philosophy. (3-0
or 3-0)



                                                   314
PHIL 315 Kant (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of the philosophy of Immanuel Kant,
focusing primarily on Kant’s seminal work,
Critique of Pure Reason.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of philosophy. (3-0
or 3-0)

PHIL 320 Social and Political
Philosophy (3 sem. hrs.)
An examination of foundational ideas and
problems in political life and thought. Both
classical and contemporary texts are used.
Concepts to be treated include the state, society,
the citizen, democracy, liberty, equality, authority,
obligation, and disobedience.

Cross-listed: POLS 320.
Prerequisite(s): 3 sem. hrs. of philosophy or
political studies, or third year standing. (3-0 or 3-0)

PHIL 331 Environmental Philosophy
(3 sem. hrs.)
Explores the theological and philosophical
dimensions of the doctrine of creation and from
there highlights the various philosophical shifts of
outlook that helped usher in modern naturalism
and its notions of nature. We will investigate the
metaphysics behind the fact/value dichotomy,
various environmental ethical frameworks, the
case for the moral status of non-human animals
and abiotic entities, the evolution of the ecological
crisis, the conceptual substructures of some
popular contemporary environmental frameworks,
and some of the agendas of response to our
current ecological crisis.

NB: PHIL/GENV 221 and PHIL/GENV 331
may not both be taken for credit.
Cross-listed: GENV 331.
Prerequisite(s): Second year status (or
instructor’s permission).

PHIL 333 Philosophy of Literature (3
sem. hrs.)
This course surveys major ancient, medieval,
modern, and postmodern approaches that attempt
a theory of literature. The course places modern
and postmodern theories in historical perspective
by reading key ancient and medieval authors. In
particular, resources from the Latin Scholastic
tradition most relevant to contemporary debates
about literary theory are highlighted.

NB: Not offered every year.
Prerequisite(s): 3 sem. hrs. of philosophy.

PHIL 340 Moral Philosophy (3 sem.
hrs.)
The problem of determining standards of right
and wrong as well as the problem of determining
what is of value in itself. The moral theories of
prominent philosophers, both ancient and
modern, are examined.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): 3 sem. hrs. of philosophy (PHIL
106 or 210 are recommended). (3-0 or 3-0)

PHIL 350 Symbolic Logic (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of the propositional calculus,
quantification theory, the theory of definite
descriptions, and other topics in modern symbolic
logic.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): PHIL 103 or instructor’s
consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

PHIL 370 Aesthetics (3 sem. hrs.)
This course doesn’t merely explore different
questions about the nature, value, and meaning of
beauty, artworks, and aesthetic experience; its
primary goal is to assist students in developing
lifestyles that embody the values, pleasures, and
risks of moving through God’s creation with deep
aesthetic attention coupled to an expansive
imagination.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: SAMC 370.
Prerequisite(s): Third or fourth year standing or
3 sem. hrs. of philosophy or instructor’s consent.
(3-0 or 3-0)

PHIL 380 Philosophy of Science (3
sem. hrs.)
An examination of some of the central
philosophical issues raised by science. Topics
include scientific method, explanations and laws in



                                               315
science, scientific progress, confirmation, and the
structure of scientific theories.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): Third or fourth year standing or
PHIL 103 or instructor’s consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

PHIL 383 Reason and Belief in God (3
sem. hrs.)
A survey of central issues arising from the
question, Is belief in God rational? Topics include
arguments concerning the existence of God,
religious pluralism, natural science and religious
belief, religious language, and critiques of natural
theology from Kierkegaard and Reformed
Epistemology.

Cross-listed: RELS 383.
Prerequisite(s): 3 sem. hrs. of philosophy or
third year standing. (3-0; 3-0)

PHIL 384 Suffering and Belief in God
(3 sem. hrs.)
An examination of key issues pertaining to
suffering and belief in God. Topics include the
problem of evil, arguments from suffering,
original sin, everlasting suffering, and providence.

Cross-listed: RELS 385.
Prerequisite(s): 3 sem. hrs. of philosophy or
third year standing. (3-0; 3-0)

PHIL 390 Existentialism (3 sem. hrs.)
Through the profound questions they ask about
human life, we explore the verities of human
embodiment from the theist (Kierkegaard,
Dostoevsky, Heschel, and Percy) and from the
non-theist (Nietzsche, Hesse, Heidegger, Camus,
and Sartre) existentialist perspectives: Are there
invariants within the human condition? Is human
identity essentially tied to its historical-cultural
embodiment? Do humans have an essence or
nature? Are humans fundamentally different from
all other animals? Is there meaning to human life?
Are human relationships doomed to failure? Are
humans capable of authentic lives? Is the notion
of God merely a comforting projection arising out
of human weakness? Etc.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): Second year standing or 3 sem.
hrs. of philosophy. (3-0 or 3-0)

PHIL 412 Issues in Contemporary
Philosophy (3 sem. hrs.)
Central issues arising in twentieth century
philosophy, particularly within the Anglo-
American analytic movement. Recent topics have
included the rise and demise of logical positivism,
the philosophy of Wittgenstein, Rorty’s attack on
the Mirror of Nature, and issues raised by
continental European philosophy.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of philosophy and
third year standing. (3-0 or 3-0)

PHIL 415 Contemporary Political
Philosophy (3 sem. hrs.)
This course examines the political thought of
twentieth century political philosophers, primarily
from the Western political tradition. Attention is
given to selected primary and secondary literature
of contemporary political theorists. Systematic
examination of different theorists encourages a
broader understanding of the rich tradition of
political philosophy in the twentieth century.

Cross-listed: POLS 415.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of political studies
including POLS 101. (3-0 or 3-0)

PHIL 418 Social and Political
Concepts of Community in
Contemporary Political Theory (3 sem.
hrs.)
Provides the student with an in-depth study of the
social and political concepts of community.
Attention is focused on how recognition of
community brings into play the tension between
individual and collective/group rights. Course
lectures, reading assignments, and in class
discussion provide an overview of the following
topics: interpretation/hermeneutics of
community, roots of community theory, myth of
community, quest for community, Christian
community, recognition of minority communities
in politics, problems associated with the concept
of community, recognition of group rights, the
liberal-communitarian debate over community,



                                                    316
and problems associated with communitarian
theory.

Cross-listed: POLS/SOCI 418.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of philosophy and
third year standing. (3-0 or 3-0)

PHIL 420 Authors (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of a major philosopher or philosophical
system. Involving substantial reading and the
writing of a major paper, the course is available by
special request to students who already have at
least a minor in philosophy, on a directed study
basis.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): Philosophy major or instructor’s
consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

PHIL 421 Postmodern Philosophy (3
sem. hrs.)
An in-depth investigation into major postmodern
texts. Authors considered include Nietzsche,
Foucault, Derrida, and their critics. Both the
philosophical and historical foundations of
modernism and postmodernism will be explored.
The historicist focus on the origins and contexts
of these ideas will receive considerable attention.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of philosophy and
third year standing. (3-0 or 3-0)

PHIL 430 Honours Thesis (3 sem.
hrs.)
A 40–60-page paper on a topic of the student’s
choosing (subject to departmental approval) on an
important philosophic issue or thinker. An oral
defence and a library-acceptable copy are required.
This course is to be taken in the final year by all
Honours students in Philosophy.

Prerequisite(s): Fourth year standing; acceptance
into the Philosophy Honours program;
completion of PHIL 420 in previous semester. (3-
0 or 3-0)

PHIL 460 Philosophy of Language (3
sem. hrs.)
This course surveys central issues in philosophy of
language, including: theories of truth and
reference, the relationship between language,
thought, and mind, constructivist and structuralist
accounts of language. A sub-theme for the course
is the relationship between the philosophy of
language and other core areas of philosophy.

Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of philosophy, or
instructor’s consent. (0-0; 3-0)

PHIL 470 Philosophy of Knowledge
and Rational Belief (3 sem. hrs.)
A descriptive and critical inquiry into the theory of
knowledge, including such topics as
foundationalism, relativism, evidence, warrant,
cognitive reliability, skepticism, and the
relationship of cognitive science and psychology
to philosophical accounts of knowledge and
rational inquiry.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of philosophy and
third year standing. (3-0 or 3-0)

PHIL 483 The Evidential Force of
Religious Experience (3 sem. hrs.)
Examines the place of evidence in religion and
assesses the evidential force of religious
experience. Such experiences as near-death
experiences, visions, conversions, mystical states
of consciousness, and other topics that have
garnered ongoing public attention are discussed.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: RELS 483.
Prerequisite(s): Third year standing and 6 sem.
hrs. of philosophy or instructor’s consent. (3-0 or
3-0)

PHIL 490 Philosophy of Mind (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course explores the philosophically
perplexing tasks of finding a place for human
consciousness in, and the mind’s causal relations
to, the natural world. It also investigates the
theories put forward to address these tasks, e.g.,
dualistic theories like substance dualism, dual-
attribute theory, epiphenomenalism, and
emergentism, and the monistic theories like
physicalism (reductive, eliminative, and non-
reductive), lived-body phenomenology, and
neutral monism.


                                                 317
NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of philosophy or
third year standing.



Philosophy,
Graduate Courses
PHIL 510 Issues in Social Justice (3
sem. hrs.)
An examination of ethical issues that pertain to
social justice, addressing such topics as the
distribution of wealth, the difference between
equality and equity, the effects of globalization,
and the morality of war.

PHIL 511 Kant (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of the philosophy of Immanuel Kant,
focusing primarily on Kant’s seminal work,
Critique of Pure Reason.

PHIL 512 Twentieth Century
Philosophy (3 sem. hrs.)
This course acquaints students with important
philosophical developments in Western Anglo-
American philosophy during the twentieth
century. These include analytic philosophy,
ordinary language philosophy, and recent
developments questioning the traditional value
and role of philosophy. The writings of major
philosophers are studied throughout, and
emphasis is placed upon epistemological,
metaphysical, and linguistic issues. Some attention
is given to examining the relationships between
these philosophical movements and others, e.g.,
those that characterize postmodernism. Attention
is occasionally given to points that carry
implications for Christian faith.

PHIL 513 British Empiricism (3 sem.
hrs.)
A study of empiricist philosophy in the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries. Selected writings of
Hobbes, Locke, Berkeley, and Hume are analyzed
and interpreted. As we discuss each author’s ideas,
we will evaluate their positions on the limits of
knowledge and experience, the intelligibility of
revelatory truth, the existence of God, the
divisibility of reality, the role of nature, and the
ethics and politics of human life.

PHIL 514 Reason and the
Enlightenment (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of rationalist philosophy in the European
Enlightenment period of the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries. Selected writings of
Descartes, Spinoza, and Leibniz are analyzed and
interpreted. As we discuss each author’s ideas, we
will evaluate their positions on the limits of
reason, the intelligibility of revealed truth, the
existence of God, the divisibility of reality, the role
of nature, and the ethics and politics of human
life. In the process of dialoguing about these ideas,
we shall also study the historical importance of the
Enlightenment in modernity as well as the original
intent of the philosophers in question with
attention to their historic context. We shall also
assess the enduring relevance of the
Enlightenment to the modern age.

PHIL 515 Contemporary Political
Philosophy (3 sem. hrs.)
An examination of twentieth century political
philosophy through reading of texts by major
contemporary political philosophers.

PHIL 520 Social and Political
Philosophy (3 sem. hrs.)
An examination of foundational ideas and
problems in political life and thought. Both
classical and contemporary texts are used.
Concepts to be treated include the state, society,
the citizen, democracy, liberty, equality, authority,
obligation, and disobedience.

PHIL 521 Postmodern Philosophy (3
sem. hrs.)
An in-depth investigation into major postmodern
texts. Authors considered include Nietzsche,
Foucault, Derrida, and their critics. Both the
philosophical and historical foundations of
modernism and postmodernism will be explored.
The historicist focus on the origins and contexts
of these ideas will receive considerable attention.

PHIL 540 Moral Philosophy (3 sem.
hrs.)



                                                       318
The problem of determining standards of right
and wrong as well as the problem of determining
what is of value in itself. The moral theories of
prominent philosophers, both ancient and
modern, are examined.

PHIL 550 Symbolic Logic (3 sem. hrs.)
This course acquaints students with the elements
of symbolic logic and its methods of deduction,
including: the quantificational calculus, definite
descriptions, identity, and the logic of relations.
The significance of symbolic logic is examined in
relation to logical atomism as advanced early in
the twentieth century by Ludwig Wittgenstein and
Bertrand Russell.

PHIL 560 Philosophy of Language (3
sem. hrs.)
Examines a range of topics within philosophy of
language. Includes an overview of several works
considered classics in the field (e.g., Wittgenstein,
Quine, Searle, Alston, Grice), as well as critical
review of major schools of thought in regard to
language and criticism. Insights from linguistics
and related disciplines, including text linguistics
and sociolinguistics, are considered in evaluating
the schools of thought.

PHIL 570 Philosophy of Knowledge
and Rational Belief (3 sem. hrs.)
A descriptive and critical inquiry into the theory of
knowledge, including such topics as
foundationalism, relativism, evidence, warrant,
cognitive reliability, skepticism, and the
relationship of cognitive science and psychology
to philosophical accounts of knowledge and
rational inquiry.

PHIL 571 Aesthetics (3 sem. hrs.)
This course doesn’t merely explore different
questions about the nature, value, and meaning of
beauty, artworks, and aesthetic experience; it also
sensitizes students to the value, pleasures, and
risks of moving through the world with deep
perceptual attention coupled to an expansive
imagination.

PHIL 573 Reason and Belief in God (3
sem. hrs.)
A survey of central issues arising from the
question, “Is belief in God rational?” Topics
include arguments concerning the existence of
God, religious pluralism, natural science and
religious belief, religious language, and critiques of
natural theology from Kierkegaard and Reformed
Epistemology.

PHIL 583 Religious Experience
Seminar (3 sem. hrs.)
Examines the place of evidence in religion and
assesses the evidential force of religious
experience and related phenomena. The main
body of the course addresses the evidential force
of such experiences as near-death experiences,
visions, mystical states of consciousness, as well as
the Shroud of Turin as a unique religious artifact.
Surveys some major contributors to the critical
study of religious experience, e.g.: William James,
Rudolf Otto, and R.C. Zaehner, and examines
competing theories for religious phenomena, e.g.,
psychological and neurophysiological explanations
for near-death and visionary experiences.

PHIL 584 Suffering and Belief in God
(3 sem. hrs.)
Examines some key issues pertaining to suffering
and belief in God. Topics include the problem of
evil, arguments from suffering original sin,
everlasting suffering, and providence.

PHIL 590 Philosophy of Mind (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course explores the philosophically
perplexing tasks of finding a place for human
consciousness in, and the mind’s causal relations
to, the natural world. It also investigates the
theories put forward to address these tasks, e.g.,
dualistic theories like substance dualism, dual-
attribute theory, epiphenomenalism, and
emergentism, and the monistic theories like
physicalism (reductive, eliminative, and non-
reductive), idealism (ontological and conceptual),
and neutral monism.

PHIL 591 Existentialism (3 sem. hrs.)
Explore primary source material from five major
(atheist and theist) existentialist philosophers,
excerpts of existentialist fiction, a book that offers
an overview of the common themes of
existentialism, and another rife with existentialist


                                                  319
themes that helps readers assess their own degree
of existential alienation. Students engage in daily
discussions and lectures on the material read.
Students write two papers: a book review and a
research paper, and keep a journal tracking their
intellectual, emotional, and spiritual journey
through class readings and lectures. In small
groups, students discuss and share their insights
and struggles with existentialism.

PHIL 600 Human Nature: Competing
Philosophical Views (3 sem. hrs.)
This course examines some of the most influential
views of human nature advanced by philosophers
in the history of Western civilization, and explores
the implications of these views for ethics,
epistemology, political philosophy, and
metaphysics.

PHIL 603 Social Ethics Seminar (3
sem. hrs.)
Examines ethical questions concerning life and
death. Special emphasis is placed on
understanding and evaluating moral and legal
perspectives on these questions, within the larger
tradition of Western philosophy, and in the face
of the current technological revolution. Issues
include: the moral status of humans, the meaning
of personhood, sanctity of life versus quality of
life, genetic engineering, reproductive
technologies, euthanasia and physician-assisted
suicide, abortion.

PHIL 607 Special Topics in
Philosophy (3 sem. hrs.)
Topics may vary. Courses offered to date:
 • Existence, Truth, and Possibility
 • Medieval Cosmology
 • Empiricism
 • Neoplatonism and Early Christianity
 • Foundations of Ethics

PHIL 610 Research Design/Seminar
(3 sem. hrs.)
Under the direction of the student’s approved
thesis advisor, a course of reading and study which
leads to the development of both a significant
bibliographical essay (or annotated bibliography)
and a thesis proposal. The latter includes at least
the following: major question(s) to be addressed;
significance of the issue(s); methodologies to be
used; theories to be addressed and primary
sources to be examined.

PHIL 611/612 Thesis (3, 3 sem. hrs.)

PHIL 613 Major Essay (3 sem. hrs.)
Under the direction of a supervisor, students not
pursuing thesis research will write a major paper
of approximately 10-15,000 words in length.

PHIL 621 Philosophical Perspectives
on Religious Pluralism (3 sem. hrs.)
This course surveys and engages central
philosophical issues relevant to assessing
normative religious pluralism.

PHIL 623 Questions of Human Nature
(3 sem. hrs.)
This course examines some of the most influential
views of human nature advanced by philosophers
and scientists in the history of Western
civilization, and explores the implications of these
views for ethics, epistemology, and metaphysics.
The ideas of Plato and Aristotle, as well as ideas
that Christianity has drawn from these ancient
Greek philosophers are examined before
exploring views advanced in modernity and
postmodernity.

PHIL 625 Philosophy of Technology (3
sem. hrs.)
This course surveys and engages philosophical
issues connected to technology, and the human
manipulation and transformation of nature. For
example, is the human good essentially tied to
technological development? Should technological
advancement be allowed to constrain or even
determine social, political, and moral decisions? Is
technology an essentially neutral means to ends
otherwise determined or do technological means
bring with them their own ends? What are the
differences between the natural and the artificial?
Has technology taken the place formerly held by
religion or spirituality?

PHIL 635 Twentieth Century Analytic
Philosophy (3 sem. hrs.)
Since philosophy’s roots in ancient Greece,
philosophers have traditionally utilized critical


                                                    320
analysis and the tools of reason and logic in
pursuing answers to philosophical questions.
However, the analytic focus of contemporary
philosophy has been shaped most significantly by
the philosophical tradition launched by Bertrand
Russell, G.E. Moor, and Gottlob Frege at the
dawn of the twentieth century.

PHIL 645 Philosophy and Religion (3
sem. hrs.)
Explores the foundations of religious belief and
faith, particularly the issue of the rationality of
religion. The role of methodology is examined,
including the value of deductive, inductive, and
abductive reasoning; also the question whether the
method applicable to religious belief is unique to
it. The work of recent philosophical theologians
and their critics is examined and evaluated.

PHIL 665 Philosophy of Competing
Paradigms (3 sem. hrs.)
This course examines the triumph of secular
naturalism in academic/educated culture, and
proposes rational grounds for advancing historic
Christian theism. Trinitarian faith is viewed here
as having the structure of theories that postulate
the existence of unobservable objects. These
theories adopt a unique method of “defining” the
entities or beings postulated to exist; this method
is shown to be compatible with historic theism.
Moreover, the Resurrection of Jesus is identified
as the central tenet for which evidence additional
to that found Holy Scripture is needed in our
secular context. The Shroud of Turin and
contemporary visions of Jesus are shown to offer
such evidence. While no objection is registered to
allowing science to explore any features of the
Universe, Christian theism is presented as
supplementing such scientific knowledge.

PHIL 675 Metaphilosophy (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course examines the character of Philosophy
as an academic discipline, with particular attention
to the kinds of claims that are central to its
inquiry, such as Logic, Metaphysics,
Epistemology, Ethics, and Aesthetics. The
feasibility of the claim that Philosophy is an
“objective” discipline, and that its contributions
are as significant as the “factual” matters handled
in any social or natural science, are examined.
Various subfields within Philosophy are given
special attention, including Ethics, Logic,
Epistemology, and Metaphysics.



Physics
PHYS 111 Fundamentals of Physics I
(3 sem. hrs.)
Students investigate physical reality employing
basic principles of Newtonian mechanics which
allow the description and explanation of motion:
three-dimensional kinematics, dynamics of
particles and rigid bodies including work, energy,
momentum, rotational motion, simple harmonic
motion, and fluids.

Co-requisite(s): MATH 123.
Prerequisite(s): Physics 12. (3-3; 0-0)

PHYS 112 Fundamentals of Physics II
(3 sem. hrs.)
The basic principles of classical electromagnetism
and waves: mechanical waves, Coulomb’s law,
electric fields, Gauss’s law, Faraday’s law, AC
circuits, electromagnetic waves, geometrical
optics.

Prerequisite(s): MATH 123, PHYS 111. (0-0; 3-
3)

PHYS 210 Conceptual Modern Physics
(3 sem. hrs.)
A survey of the development of scientific theories,
emphasizing the ideas that emerged in physics in
the twentieth century. The course is designed so
that general audience students become engaged
with the conceptual aspects of topics in relativity
and quantum mechanics.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): Second year standing. (3-0 or 3-
0))

PHYS 215 Stellar and Galactic
Astronomy (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to stellar and galactic astronomy,
and to the tools and techniques of astronomy.
Discussion of the types of stars and their



                                                321
formation, energy production, and end states; the
nature of nebulae, star clusters, black holes,
galaxies, and quasars; modern cosmology;
astrobiology. Several daytime and night-time
observation sessions are undertaken. Historical,
philosophical, and Christian theological
perspectives are considered.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): Second year standing. (3-0; 0-0)

PHYS 220 Mechanics (3 sem. hrs.)
Topics in classical mechanics, including particle
motion in three dimensions, noninertial reference
frames, central forces, rigid body motion,
Lagrange’s equation of motion, and Hamilton’s
variational principle.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): PHYS 111; MATH 223. (3, 3 or
3,3)

PHYS 230 Electricity and Magnetism
(3 sem. hrs.)
Electric fields and potentials of static charge
distributions, currents, magnetic fields and the
vector potential, electromagnetic induction,
electric and magnetic energy, electromagnetic
properties of matter.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): PHYS 112; MATH 223. (3, 3 or
3, 3)

PHYS 240 Physical Chemistry (3 sem.
hrs.)
Introduction to thermodynamics as applied to
chemical reactions. The First and Second Laws of
Thermodynamics, free energy and equilibria,
phase equilibria and electro-chemistry.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: CHEM 240.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 111, 112; or CHEM 103,
112; or CHEM 103, 104 with instructor’s consent;
MATH 123, 124. (3-4 or 3-4)

PHYS 310 Topics in Modern Physics
(3 sem. hrs.)
Introduction to the special theory of relativity; the
principles of quantum mechanics and its
interpretation; aspects of atomic, nuclear and
particle physics; and cosmology.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): PHYS 112; MATH 223. (3-0 or
3-0)

PHYS 320 Digital Electronics and
Instrumentation (3 sem. hrs.)
To provide students with a working knowledge of
basic semiconductor devices and gates and their
use for implementing logic devices and simple
measurement and control functions, and to
provide experience in constructing and using
circuit diagrams and test/measurement
equipment.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): CMPT 141; MATH 124; PHYS
230; or instructor’s consent. (3-3 or 3-3)

PHYS 321 Differential Equations (4
sem. hrs.)
First order differential equations, linear differential
equations, Laplace transforms, systems of
differential equations, non-linear systems, series
solutions, introduction to partial differential
equations. Special emphasis is placed on
applications to physics and engineering.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-Listed: MATH 321.
Co-requisite(s): MATH 223, 250. (4-0 or 4-0)

PHYS 341 Advanced Physical
Chemistry (3 sem. hrs.)
The fundamental concepts of matter and its
structure in relation to energy. Quantum
mechanics, statistical thermodynamics,
spectroscopy, kinetics, and the solid state.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: CHEM 341.
Co-requisite(s): MATH 223.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 240. (3-4; or 3-4)

PHYS 360 Optics (3 sem. hrs.)
Geometrical and physical optics: reflection and
refraction, interference, coherence, polarization,
diffraction, lasers, and holography.



                                                   322
NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): PHYS 230. (3-3 or 3-3)

PHYS 400 Directed Studies in Physics
(3 sem. hrs.)
Students are required to produce an outline of one
topic to be studied in consultation with the
instructor. A course of reading and/or
experimentation is pursued according to the
approved outline. Assessment may be via
examination and/or a final written report.

NB: This course can only be taken with
instructor’s consent.
Prerequisite(s): Advanced standing in PHYS
312.



Political Studies
POLS 101 Introduction to Political
Thinking (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to the basic concepts,
institutions, and ruling ideas in political thought
and action. Through the study of classic political
texts, competing concepts like equality and
freedom, justice and power, are introduced within
the context of conflicting ideologies like
liberalism, socialism, and conservatism. The
meaning of citizenship in postmodern
contemporary liberal democracies are examined
and contrasted with competing visions of the
good society.

Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0 or 3-0)

POLS 211 International Politics (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course is an introduction to the theoretical
and empirical concerns of international politics. It
is designed to go beyond the simple observation
of international politics and delve into the ways we
seek to explain and predict how political actors
behave. The first section of the course is dedicated
to understanding the history of the field of
international relations as a foundation for further
study. The second section will consider the
traditional Realist perspective of international
relations and then move on to deal with more
modern revisions of received scholarship such as
Liberalism, Marxism, Feminism, and
Constructivism. Along the way, we will encounter
explanations for war and peace, cooperation and
dispute, as well as explanations for the creation of
major international treaties and organizations such
as the United Nations. The third section of the
course will begin to deal with modern challenges
and themes in international political economy and
security.

Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0 or 3-0)

POLS 234 Canadian Government and
Politics in Comparative Perspective (3
sem. hrs.)
Provides the student with an overview of the
Canadian system of government in a comparative
approach that includes study of British, American,
and Canadian political and government
institutions and practices. It offers a comparative
study of how basic concepts, principles, and
institutions associated with different expressions
of liberal-democratic governments highlight the
diversity of political experience, reveal the
interdependence of political systems, and show
the uniqueness of Canada’s political system.
Particular attention is given to the manner in
which Parliament attempts to facilitate and
develop public policy that reflects the diverse
interests and aspirations of its citizens.

Cross-listed: SOCI 234.
Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0 or 3-0)

POLS 237 Co-Existence, Genocide,
Reconciliation: Indigenous
Nationhood and Canada (3 sem. hrs.)
The history of First Nations, Métis Nations and
Inuit Nations in Canada from time immemorial
through to the present from various perspectives
gained from interactions with Indigenous authors
and guest speakers and cultural experiences such
as immersion trips to Indigenous territories.
Engage broad economic, social and political
themes associated with Canada's settler society
and gain cultural intelligence by analyzing from an
Indigenous perspective how standard narratives of
progress shaped early encounters, the fur trade
economy, governmental policy, Christianity and
culture, residential schools, land reserves and self-
government. Considers the ways in which


                                                 323
Indigenous nations utilized and reshaped Canada’s
historical narrative to resist assimilation,
paternalism, “civilization”, marginalisation, and
integration. Examines arguments for partnership,
cooperation, negotiation and reconciliation in a
movement towards peaceful co-existence.

Prerequisite(s): None.

POLS 250 Classical Political
Philosophy (3 sem. hrs.)
Examines the impact of Christianity on Western
thought with respect to politics and political
philosophy. It explores the unique encounter
between Jerusalem and Athens that has been
described as the “secret vitality of the West.”
Special attention is paid to the disagreement or
conflict between a theological and philosophical
approach to the study of political life.

Prerequisite(s): POLS 101. (3-0 or 3-0)

POLS 308 Political Economy of
Developing Nations (3 sem. hrs.)
This course provides an analysis of the
relationship of government policies and economic
development in selected Asian, African, and Latin
American countries. Topics include the role of
leadership and public policy; challenges of
development; obstacles to democratization; and
the interaction of domestic and global
political/economic structures.

Prerequisite(s): POLS 101 and 211, or
instructor’s consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

POLS 310 Issues in Social Justice (3
sem. hrs.)
An examination of ethical issues that pertain to
social justice, addressing such topics as the
distribution of wealth, the difference between
equality and equity, the effects of globalization,
and the morality of war.

Cross-listed: PHIL 310.
Prerequisite(s): 3 sem. hrs. of political studies or
philosophy; or third year standing. (3-0 or 3-0)

POLS 312 Globalization and Global
Governance (3 sem. hrs.)
Examines the causes and consequences of
globalization and the transitional institutions
established to cope with this process. The course
examines the meaning of global governance and
how this differs from governance of domestic
societies. It also identifies the significant
international institutions involved in global
governance and assesses their contribution. The
role of various international governmental and
non-governmental organizations are studied in
relation to such issues as global trade, the
environment, human rights, economic
development, and international migration.

Prerequisite(s): POLS 101 and 211, or
instructor’s consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

POLS 314 International Political
Economy (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of the globalization of the world economy
and the political factors that shape this process.
Students become familiar with the recent history
of international trade, global economic relations,
and the role of various players in foreign
economic policy making. Using case studies of
representative governments, students explore
models of fiscal and monetary policy and types of
trade protection. Other topics include: political
factors affecting emerging and transitional
economies; role of trade groupings; impact of
multinational corporations; negotiations in the
World Trade Organization; and the problems
related to global industries, such as airlines or oil.

Prerequisite(s): POLS 101 and 211, or
instructor’s consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

POLS 320 Social and Political
Philosophy (3 sem. hrs.)
An examination of foundational ideas and
problems in political life and thought. Both
classical and contemporary texts are used.
Concepts to be treated include the state, society,
the citizen, democracy, liberty, equality, authority,
obligation, and disobedience.

Cross-listed: PHIL 320.
Prerequisite(s): 3 sem. hrs. of political studies or
philosophy; or third year standing. (3-0 or 3-0)




                                                  324
POLS 330 Law and Canadian Politics
(3 sem. hrs.)
This course provides students with an overview of
important themes in Canadian law: its sources,
theories of jurisprudence, federalism and the
courts, and how the legal framework and the
Supreme Court decisions shape public discourse
in Canada on political issues. Through the
examination of milestone court cases, particularly
Supreme Court decisions since the Charter of
Rights and Freedoms (1982), the symbiotic
relationship between the judiciary and the
legislative branches of government are established.

Prerequisite(s): POLS/SOCI 234, HUMA 130
or BUSI 245. (3-0 or 3-0)

POLS 332 Issues in the History of
British Columbia (3 sem. hrs.)
The history of British Columbia from its earliest
beginnings to the late 1980s. The province’s move
from regionalism, to provincialism, to
internationalism by examining many of the social,
cultural, political, and economic forces of change
which shaped the “West Beyond the West” in
Canada. Specific aspects of BC’s history that
particularly enlighten us about the character of the
region, its unique place in Canadian history, and
how these events have shaped the Province today.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: HIST 332.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of Political Studies
including POLS 234, or instructor’s consent. (3-0
or 3-0)

POLS 334 Issues in Canadian
Government and Politics (3 sem. hrs.)
Provides the student with a detailed examination
of the political issues that divide and unite
Canadians. Course topics include discussion of
alternative theoretical approaches to Canadian
politics; regionalism, citizenship, and political
participation; the French-English Cleavage;
provincialism versus federalism; aboriginal
politics; gender and class issues; the United States’
and Canada’s uneasy relationship; multiculturalism
and bilingualism as key indicators of Canadian
political culture; the Executive in Parliament
dispute; legislative politics and judicial
interpretation; and law and constitution.
Cross-listed: HIST 334.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of political studies
including POLS 234, or instructor’s consent. (3-0
or 3-0)

POLS 335 Development of the
Canadian Constitution (3 sem. hrs.)
A survey of the historical development of the
Canadian Constitution from 1867 to the present.
The course covers the search for an amending
formula and the patriation of the Constitution; the
evolving nature of the federation; the Meech Lake
Accord; the Charlottetown Accord; the October
26 Referendum; Western demands for major
changes to the Senate and other national
institutions of the federation; and the unfinished
constitutional agenda. It also examines the
profound effect on law and public policy
development resulting from the Canadian Charter
of Rights and Freedoms.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: HIST 335.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of political studies
including POLS 234, or instructor’s consent. (3-0
or 3-0)

POLS 352 Government and Politics of
the United States (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to American politics, including
the major branches of government: the
presidency, the Congress, and the Supreme Court.
The dynamics of American political institutions
and their interaction. The prime emphasis is on
national politics, particularly the interaction of the
executive and legislative branches, including
presidential decision-making.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: HIST 352.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of political studies
including POLS 234, or instructor’s consent. (3-0
or 3-0)

POLS 355 American Foreign Policy (3
sem. hrs.)
A study of principal themes in United States
foreign policy with in-depth review of post-
Second World War Presidential periods. Students
analyze the causes and results of American policy
choices in the context of evolving world order.


                                                  325
The course explores philosophy and leadership
styles.

Cross-listed: HIST 355.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of political studies
including POLS 234, or instructor’s consent. (3-0
or 3-0)

POLS 361-369 Political Science
Practicum (1-3 sem. hrs.)
A supervised field experience in an approved
political, governmental, or related setting.

NB: Pass/Fail courses.
Prerequisite(s): Honours, major, concentration,
or minor in political studies or international
studies. Second year standing or higher, 6 sem.
hrs. of political studies, and at least a C+ average.
Students may include a maximum of 6 sem. hrs. in
their political studies major, concentration, or
minor, and a maximum of 9 sem. hrs. in their
degree.

POLS 377 Twentieth Century China
and East Asia (3 sem. hrs.)
A cultural and political history of China and Japan
since 1900 with an emphasis on late twentieth
century issues. Course includes discussion of
Hong Kong and Taiwan as Chinese territories and
Korea as a primary neighbour of China and Japan.
Of special interest are the relations of Japan and
China with the United States.

Cross-listed: HIST 377.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of political studies
including POLS 211, or instructor’s consent. (3-0
or 3-0)

POLS 378 Politics and Development of
the Asia-Pacific Region (3 sem. hrs.)
This course explores the contemporary political,
economic, and social conditions of countries in
east and southeast Asia as case studies of
development. Central to the course is the so-called
Asian Miracle: what are its causes and why have
some countries been left behind? Other topics
include Japan’s and Singapore’s models of
development; response to China’s economic and
political power in the region; international
relations including selected conflict areas; and the
prospects for regional integration. Countries
typically covered in this region face the Pacific in a
chain from Indonesia in the south to Korea and
Japan in the north.

Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of political studies.
(3-0 or 3-0)

POLS 383 Public Administration in
Canada (3 sem. hrs.)
An overview of public administration in Canada -
its importance, structure, functions, key issues,
best practices, and practical applications. Course
content focuses on municipal, provincial, and
federal levels of government. Special attention is
placed on practical applications to areas of current
public and student interest.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of political studies
including POLS 234, or instructor’s consent. (3-0
or 3-0)

POLS 391 Canadian Governmental
Leadership (3 sem. hrs.)
In the setting of the historical Booth Mansion in
Ottawa, students are invited to explore the history
of Canadian political leadership. Using the
historical method, including research in primary
sources, they will evaluate the leadership of
Canadian Prime Ministers and examine how they
addressed the needs and crises of the nation. By
means of their enquiries into Canada’s political
leadership, students will develop their own
theories of effective leadership.

Cross-listed: HIST/SOCI 391.
Prerequisite(s): Admission into Laurentian
Leadership Centre. (3-0 or 3-0)

POLS 392 Ethics and Public Affairs (3
sem. hrs.)
The philosophical basis for, and nature of, ethical
decision-making. This course examines recent and
contemporary ethical issues facing leaders in the
political, business, and communication fields.
Students observe how leaders engage ethical
dilemmas in the Ottawa setting of their discipline.

Cross-listed: SOCI 392.
Prerequisite(s): Admission into Laurentian
Leadership Centre. (3-0 or 3-0)


                                                  326
POLS 395, 396 LLC Internship (3, 3
sem. hrs.)
Students select an internship worth 6 sem. hrs. of
credit towards their major. Placements have
included working in a Member of Parliament's
office, political party office, governmental
department or agency, national and local media
outlets, a business office (in accordance with a
student's special interests), or non-governmental
organization. There are a variety of internship sites
from which to choose that would help to advance
the student's career interests. The internships
occur every afternoon and some full days and
offer an opportunity to learn from experts and
meet leaders in the field. These internships
provide a broader learning experience than what
students would experience if they were employees
of an organization. Internships are designed to
show the student the inner workings of the
organization and how that organization interfaces
with others.

POLS 406 War, Peace, and Society (3
sem. hrs.)
A survey of the changing nature of and
approaches to war and its effect on society from
the Middle Ages to the present. Course topics
include the various visions and proposals for
peace, and the nature of nuclear war.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: HIST 406.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of political studies
including POLS 101 or 211, or instructor’s
consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

POLS 415 Contemporary Political
Philosophy (3 sem. hrs.)
This course examines the political thought of one
or more twentieth century political philosophers,
primarily from the Western Political Tradition.
Attention is given to selected primary and
secondary literature of contemporary political
theorists. A systematic examination of different
theorists in each course offering encourages a
broader understanding of the rich tradition of
political philosophy in the twentieth century.

Cross-listed: PHIL 415.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of political studies
including POLS 101, or instructor’s consent. (3-0
or 3-0)

POLS 418 Social and Political
Concepts of Community in
Contemporary Political Theory (3 sem.
hrs.)
Provides the student with an in-depth study of the
social and political concepts of community.
Attention is focused on how recognition of
community brings into play the tension between
individual and collective/group rights. Course
lectures, reading assignments, and in class
discussion provide an overview of the following
topics: interpretation/hermeneutics of
community, roots of community theory, myth of
community, quest for community, Christian
community, recognition of minority communities
in politics, problems associated with the concept
of community, recognition of group rights, the
liberal-communitarian debate over community,
and problems associated with communitarian
theory.

Cross-listed: PHIL 418.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of political studies
(including POLS 101 or 234 or 320), and third
year standing. (3-0 or 3-0)

POLS 421 The Contemporary Middle
East (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to the concerns of contemporary
political, economic, and social development such
as state consolidation, ethnic and social
movements, poverty, and conflict through study
of the political economy of the Middle East.
Students explore the region through analysis of
selected Middle Eastern states, cultures, and
emergent issues such as underdevelopment,
religious and ethnic movements, external
intervention, and regional conflicts and disputes.

Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of political studies
(POLS 211 and 308 recommended), or
instructor’s consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

POLS 422 Contemporary South Asia (3
sem. hrs.)



                                                    327
An in-depth study of the political and economic
challenges among selected South Asian states,
highlighting the relationship between government
policies and social development. This course deals
with themes such as democracy, economic reform,
ethnic and civil conflict, gender relations, religion,
and relations between the states of South Asia.

Prerequisite(s): POLS 101 and 211 or by
instructor’s permission.

POLS 425 European Comparative
Politics and Government (3 sem. hrs.)
An exploration of special topics in European
comparative politics. The themes and geographic
focus vary from year to year. They may include
current political institutions and forces, and the
historical evolution of European politics, in both
Western and Eastern Europe. Particular attention
is given to the legal traditions that gird the
institutional frameworks of the countries under
study. This course blends an analysis of individual
nation states with an examination of the critical
issues that confront them all, which are addressed
comparatively. It takes account of both the
national and transnational factors that affect, and
are affected by, politics in Europe—notably
European integration and globalization.

Prerequisite(s): POLS 101 and one of POLS 211
or 234. (3-0; 3-0)

POLS 430 Seminar in Global Politics (3
sem. hrs.)
A seminar course devoted to intensive study of
selected issues in contemporary global politics.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): POLS 101 and 211; or
instructor’s consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

POLS 431 Religion and Global Politics
(3 sem. hrs.)
A survey of religion as a theme in global politics,
beginning with case studies in the relationship of
religion to politics and foreign policy in various
areas of the world and among various religious
traditions. Topics include religion and the politics
of states, human rights, peace and conflict,
international development, globalization, and the
foundations of global order.
Prerequisite(s): POLS 101 and 211; or by
instructor’s permission.

POLS 434 Canadian Political Thought
(3 sem. hrs.)
Examination of selected Canadian authors who
have contributed significantly to the development
of Canadian political discourse. Topics include
federalism, social democracy, multiculturalism,
feminism, compact theory, and national identity.
The course entails the systematic study of these
and related concepts in the context in which they
were elaborated, with comparison to current
interpretations and usage.

Prerequisite(s): POLS 101 and 234; or
instructor’s consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

POLS 436 Canadian and US Relations
(3 sem. hrs.)
A survey of relations between the two countries
from their origins, ranging from military and
diplomatic to intellectual and cultural contacts.
Comparative developments in the two nations are
examined.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: HIST 436.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of political studies
including POLS 234, or instructor’s consent. (3-0
or 3-0)

POLS 440 The Evolution of Canadian
Foreign Policy (3 sem. hrs.)
An overview of the formulation and trends of
Canadian foreign policy in the period since
Confederation. This course examines the domestic
and external determinants of Canadian foreign
policy, the nature of the foreign policy-making
process, and the evolution of key themes in
Canadian foreign policy.

Cross-listed: HIST 440.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of political studies
including POLS 211 or 234, or instructor’s
consent. (0-0; 3-0)

POLS 487, 488 Special Topics in
Political Science (3, 3 sem. hrs.)



                                                    328
This course examines special topics or issues in
political studies that are not considered in-depth
in other courses.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of political studies
including POLS 101 or 211 or 234, third year
standing, and instructor’s consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

POLS 493 Law, Public Policy, and
Cultural Change (3 sem. hrs.)
This course will provide students with theoretical
and practical frameworks in the areas of law and
public policy to engage with social and global
issues. Students will explore the intersection of
law, politics and culture in the setting of Canada’s
capital. Students will critique culture and identify
positive ways Christians engage and shape culture,
particularly in public policy and law. They will
explore how law and public policy are developed
through observing courts and Parliament in
action. Students will identify a critical problem in
society and suggest ways to resolve this problem
through law and public policy that is consistent
with core Christian beliefs.

Cross-listed: IDIS 493.
Prerequisite(s): Third or fourth year standing. (3-
0 or 3-0)

POLS 495, 496 Honours Thesis (3, 3
sem. hrs.)
Under supervision of the departmental faculty,
students conduct a careful review of the literature
on a topic of their choice, as well as an empirical
study of some portion of the topic. The final
written result is submitted in a 12-15,000-word
thesis. Taken in fourth year by Honours students
in political and international studies.

Prerequisite(s): Application and acceptance into
Honours program in Political Studies or Honours
program in International Studies. See department
chair or international studies coordinator.



Project Management
PMPP 201 Introduction to Project
Management (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to project management concepts,
principles, techniques, and tools. Topics include
the five processes and nine knowledge areas of the
Project Management Institute’s Project
Management Body of Knowledge Guide, and an
overview of PM software tools.

Prerequisite(s): None.

PMPP 302 Project Management
Foundation: Project Scope
Management, Schedule Management,
Cost Management (3 sem. hrs.)
A detailed examination of project management
scope, time, and cost management. The required
management knowledge related to the successful
management of project scope, time, and costs are
examined after a review of the critical knowledge
area of project integration management.

Prerequisite(s): PMPP 201 or instructor’s
permission.

PMPP 303 Principles, Tools, and
Practices of Project Risk Management
(3 sem. hrs.)
This course addresses the concepts and processes
of project risk management: to increase the
probability of the impact of positive risk and
minimize the impact of negative risk to the
successful completion of a project. Other topics
covered include risk management planning, risk
identification, risk analysis, risk responses, and risk
monitoring and controlling.

Prerequisite(s): PMPP 201 or instructor’s
permission.

PMPP 304 Philosophy, Principles, and
Practices of Quality Management (3
sem. hrs.)
Quality Management is at the heart of successful
Project Management, and training must be
intentional in delivering knowledge of the
philosophy, principles, and practices of quality
management to fulfil the responsibility of a
Project Management Program. This foundational
course combines the core of the quality
management body of knowledge with practical
hands-on learning through selective reading,


                                                   329
critical thinking, focused discussions, and
meaningful case studies.

Prerequisite(s): PMPP 201 or instructor’s
permission.

PMPP 305 Project Management
Infrastructure: Human Resources,
Communication, and Procurement (3
sem. hrs.)
This course covers the three Project Management
Institute project knowledge areas of Human
Resources Management (knowledge and processes
required to effectively and efficiently manage the
project team), Communications Management
(knowledge and process required to communicate
effectively and efficiently with all project
stakeholders), and Procurement Management
(knowledge and process required to manage
effectively and efficiently project procurement
activities).

Prerequisite(s): PMPP 201 or instructor’s
permission.

PMPP 401 Project Management
Certification (CAPM or PMP) (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course is designed to acquaint the student
with the professional certification requirements
leading to successful completion of the qualifying
examination for the project management
profession.

Prerequisite(s): PMPP 201 or instructor’s
permission.

PMPP 402 Project Management
Practicum (2 sem. hrs.)
This course is designed to acquaint the student
with the professional certification requirements
leading to successful completion of the qualifying
examination at the level of certified Project
Management Professional.

Prerequisite(s): PMPP 201 or instructor’s
permission.
Psychology
PSYC 105, 106 Introduction to
Psychology (3, 3 sem. hrs.)
A broad introduction to the field of psychology as
a science. This course addresses the practical, life-
oriented application of scientific principles of
psychology. Other topics covered include
development; learning; biological bases of
behaviour, motivation and emotion; perception;
measurement and fundamental statistics;
personality; behavioural disorders and mental
health; and group and social processes.

Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0; 3-0)

PSYC 201 Experimental Psychology (3
sem. hrs.)
Problems in research and experimentation in the
context of sub-areas of psychology such as
learning, memory, social influence, perception,
and psychophysics. Experimental, correlational,
and observational methods are all considered.

Prerequisite(s): PSYC 105, 106. Education
students with declared Special Education minor
may take the course with only one of either PSYC
105 or 106. (3-0; 0-0)

PSYC 204 Social Psychology (3 sem.
hrs.)
The relationship between the individual and
society. Motivation, interpersonal relationships,
attitude formation and change, communication,
effective group dynamics, and leadership are
topics covered in this course.

Cross-listed: SOCI 204.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 105, 106; or SOCI 101. (3-
0 or 3-0)

PSYC 207 Data Analysis (3 sem. hrs.)
The logic and the application of data analysis
techniques suitable for the behavioural sciences.
Descriptive statistics and inferential statistics,
including measures of central tendency, variability,
probability and sampling theory, correlation,
regression, and non-parametric statistics.




                                                 330
Cross-listed: SOCI 207.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 105, 106. (3-0; 0-0)

PSYC 214 Psychological Foundations
of Teaching and Learning (3 sem. hrs.)
An evaluation of psychological theories and
research relating to learning and teaching, with a
focus on developmental stages, learning theories,
motivation, classroom management, evaluation,
inter and intra-individual differences, and needs of
exceptional children.

Cross-listed: EDUC 211.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 105 or 106. (3-0; 0-0)

PSYC 215 Lifespan Development (3
sem. hrs.)
This course addresses the physical, mental,
emotional, and social growth from infancy
through adolescence, adulthood, and old age,
including death and bereavement.

Prerequisite(s): PSYC 105, 106. (3-0 or 3-0)

PSYC 239 Cross-Cultural Psychology
(3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to research and theory exploring
the cultural, community, and ecological factors
that shape human experiences. Topics include the
acquisition of cultural meaning, the development,
maintenance, and negotiation of cultural identities,
and cognitive, affective, and motivational
processes across various cultures.

Prerequisite(s): PSYC 105, 106; Education
students with declared Special Education minor
may take the course with only one of either PSYC
105 or 106. (3-0 or 3-0)

PSYC 301 Theories of Personality (3
sem. hrs.)
The major theories of personality, both traditional
and contemporary, are examined with a view to
demonstrating their usefulness in accounting for
human behaviour.

Prerequisite(s): PSYC 105, 106. (3-0; 3-0)

PSYC 305 Abnormal Psychology (3
sem. hrs.)
This course considers the symptoms, causality,
and treatment of psychopathological and
behavioural problems. Research findings, as well
as theoretical explanations, are examined.

Prerequisite(s): PSYC 105, 106; 301; plus 3
additional sem. hrs. of psychology. (3-0; 3-0)

PSYC 309 Sensation and Perception (3
sem. hrs.)
This course examines research involving basic
sensory and perceptual processes with theoretical
accounts.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 105, 106; 201; plus 3 sem.
hrs. of psychology. (3-0; 0-0)

PSYC 310 The Exceptional Child in the
Regular Classroom (3 sem. hrs.)
The study of the identification, etiology, diagnosis,
and prognosis of various exceptionalities such as
learning and physical disabilities, visual and
auditory impairments, behaviour disorders,
intellectual delays, and giftedness.

Cross-listed: EDUC 310.
Prerequisite(s): EDUC 211 or PSYC 214. (3-0 or
3-0)

PSYC 315 Psychology of Gender (3
sem. hrs.)
Exploration of the biological, psychological, and
cultural influences on gender differences and the
implications of gender differences and roles for
women and men in our society. Emphasis is on
research and theory exploring differences and/or
similarities and the origins of differences.

Prerequisite(s): PSYC 105, 106, and third year
standing. (3-0; 0-0)

PSYC 320 Tests and Measurement (3
sem. hrs.)
In the course, psychometric theory and principles
of test development are examined. Other topics
include reliability, validity, item analysis, and use
of tests in educational, industrial, and counselling
settings.




                                                  331
NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 105, 106, 207; plus 3
additional sem. hrs. of psychology. (0-0; 3-0)

PSYC 322 Research Methods (3 sem.
hrs.)
Issues and methods related to the conduct and
analysis of psychological research. Topics covered
include internal and external validity, experimental
and quasi-experimental designs, research ethics,
and analysis of variance. Projects involve both
library and empirical research components.

Prerequisite(s): PSYC 105, 106, 201, and 207;
plus 3 additional sem. hrs. of psychology. (3-0 or
3-0)

PSYC 326 Cognitive Processes (3 sem.
hrs.)
Using the “information-processing” approach,
higher cognitive activities such as attention,
memory, language, and thinking are examined in
the light of current theory and research.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 105, 106, 201; plus 3
additional sem. hrs. of psychology. (0-0; 3-0)

PSYC 330 Leadership in Organizations
and Small Groups (3 sem. hrs.)
Comprehensive understanding of leadership. The
course examines theories, models, facets of
leadership, and characteristics of effective leaders,
as well as ‘leadership’ development and current
issues.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-Listed: LDRS 330
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 105, 106; or instructor’s
consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

PSYC 331 Theories of Counselling (3
sem. hrs.)
A survey of selected theories of counselling and
psychotherapy: their theoretical base; view of the
nature of the person; key concepts; goals; roles of
therapist and client; techniques; and overall
effectiveness.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 105, 106, 301; plus 3
additional sem. hrs. of psychology. (3-0 or 3-0)

PSYC 339 Mental Health and
Adjustment (3 sem. hrs.)
A psychological perspective on the experiences
and problems humans encounter in daily living.
Topics examined include self-understanding in
such areas as love, work, religion, sexuality, values
and meaning, and interpersonal relationships, as
well as growth models and health.

Prerequisite(s): PSYC 105, 106; and at least third
year standing. (3-0; 3-0)

PSYC 340 Interpersonal and Helping
Skills (3 sem. hrs.)
Skills for developing helping relationships from a
Christian perspective. The course provides a
problem-management approach to helping:
helping theory and skills practice.

Prerequisite(s): PSYC 105, 106, 301; and 3
additional sem. hrs. of psychology. (3-0; 3-0)

PSYC 342 Psychology of Adolescence
(3 sem. hrs.)
The physical and psychological processes that take
place during adolescence. The course examines
issues of identity formation, moral development,
physical development, changes in family
relationships and development of independence,
sexuality in adolescence, a perspective on peer
relationships and pressures, and anticipation of
vocational preparation.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 105, 106, 215; plus 3
additional sem. hrs. of psychology. Education
students with declared Special Education minor
may take the course with only one of either PSYC
105 or 106. (3-0 or 3-0)

PSYC 345 Disorders of Childhood and
Adolescence (3 sem. hrs.)
This course focuses on major forms of atypical
development in childhood and adolescence. These
include disorders of behaviour and emotion,
developmental and learning problems, and
problems related to physical and mental health.



                                                   332
The focus is on the child, not just the disorder,
and the biological, psychological, developmental,
socio-cultural, and spiritual influences.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 105, 106, 215. Education
students with declared Special Education minor
may take the course with only one of either PSYC
105 or 106. (3-0 or 3-0)

PSYC 354 Brain and Behaviour (3 sem.
hrs.)
An overview of the relationship between the
nervous system and behaviour. Topics addressed
include human behaviour and clinical problems;
biological bases of emotion, learning, memory,
sexual behaviour, and homeostatic motivations;
and biochemical theories of schizophrenia, autism,
and mood disorders.

Prerequisite(s): PSYC 105, 106, 201. (3-0 or 3-0)

PSYC 356 Motivation and Emotion (3
sem. hrs.)
An advanced study of the motivational and
emotional processes that influence complex
human thought and behavior. Concepts will be
explored from historical, biological,
environmental/learning, and psychological
perspectives and applied to real-world situations.

Prerequisite(s): PSYC 201 and 207. (3-0 or 3-0)

PSYC 360 Psychology of Sport (3 sem.
hrs.)
The need for and purpose of psychology in sport
and physical activity. This course examines the
research focusing on psychological and social
psychological factors influencing athletic and
motor performance.

Cross-listed: HKIN 340.
Prerequisite(s): Third year standing. (3-0; 0-0)

PSYC 361 Practicum (3 sem. hrs.)
This practicum equips student leaders with the
knowledge, skills and experience that will enable
them to build community and lead effectively in a
residence hall setting. Class and assignments are
structured to encourage personal growth,
teamwork, and leadership development through
the process elements of empowering messages,
empowering opportunities, empowering
reflections, and solution-focused thinking.

NB: Enrolment is limited to new Resident
Assistants. (3-0; 0-0)

PSYC 365 Psychology and the
Correctional System: Prison and the
Person (3 sem. hrs.).
A critical look at how the individual is impacted
by the prison environment. Through readings,
lectures, class discussions, guest speakers, and
field interactions, the student encounters various
perspectives on the Canadian correctional system.
The student becomes familiar with current
theories of discipline and punishment and
explores alternatives to imprisonment.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 105, 106. (3-0 or 3-0)

PSYC 390 Special Topics in
Psychology (1-3 sem. hrs.)
This course is an examination of selected issues,
theories, or topics within the field of psychology.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): Third- or fourth-year psychology
majors, or other students with instructor’s
consent.

PSYC 399 Travel Study - Discover the
European Psychologists (3 sem. hrs.)
This travel studies course explores the historical
and cultural contexts that influenced the founders
of psychoanalytic and logotherapy psychologies.
Specifically, this course examines the zeitgeist of
Sigmund Freud, Carl Jung, Alfred Adler, and
Viktor Frankl and how the intellectual climate of
their time influenced their theories. The existing
political, social, religious, and economic forces -
including racial discrimination and war - will be
studied within the localities that these
psychologists lived and practiced, to understand
the global and European context for psychological
thinking and social engagement. This is an
experiential group-based course where interaction
with the various presentations and encounters are
processed throughout each day with debriefing
and feedback sessions. Engaging the intensity of


                                                 333
the experience (e.g. Dachau, Frankl & Jungian
Institutes etc.) enables a deeper connection and
learning of the social context and the dynamics of
racism and global issues.

Prerequisite(s): Third- or fourth-year psychology
majors, or other students with instructor’s
consent.

PSYC 408 History and Systems of
Psychology (3 sem. hrs.)
Historical roots of modern psychology. The
course examines major systems of thought within
the discipline in the context of a Christian view of
humans and the world.

Prerequisite(s): PSYC 105, 106; plus 18
additional sem. hrs. of psychology. (3-0; 3-0)

PSYC 409 Learning (3 sem. hrs.)
In this course, classical and operant conditioning
processes as well as motor learning, observational
learning, and the acquisition of concepts and
language are examined.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 105, 106, 201; plus 6
additional sem. hrs. of psychology. (3-0; 0-0)

PSYC 411 Psychology and Spirituality
(3 sem. hrs.)
This course examines the notion of spirituality in
light of the psychological theories of Jung, Frankl,
Maslow, May, Fromm; contemporary trans-
personal psychologists; and Christianity, as well as
several Eastern religions. Includes the exploration
of spiritual themes such as suffering, surrender
and relinquishment, forgiveness, love and unity,
ecstasy and peak experience, mysticism and
sacredness, creativity, meaning, meditation and
serenity, authenticity and truth, and birth and
death.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 105, 106, 301; plus 6
additional sem. hrs. of psychology. (3-0 or 3-0)

PSYC 412 Strategies for the
Exceptional Child (3 sem. hrs.)
This course builds upon the information
presented in introductory courses to special
education. It is intended for pre-professional
Education students, professional teachers, and
those in psychology, social services, and nursing,
and is designed to provide information and
strategies for: assessing the needs of students,
developing intervention techniques, and utilizing
the resources of various professionals to meet the
diverse needs of exceptional students and
exceptional families.

NB: Enrolment in this class includes a practicum
in a special needs setting.
Cross-listed: EDUC 412.
Prerequisite(s): EDUC/PSYC 310. (0-0; 3-1)

PSYC 415 Human Sexuality (3 sem.
hrs.)
Concepts and materials treating the meaning and
significance of human sexuality. Due to the
discussion-oriented format, full preparation,
attendance, and participation are required.

Prerequisite(s): PSYC 105, 106; and at least third
year standing. (3-0; 3-0)

PSYC 416 Psychology and the Law (3
sem. hrs.)
This course is a consideration of human behaviour
within the legal system, including issues related to
giving testimony, jury decision-making, and
defense pleas.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 105, 106, 204. (3-0 or 3-0)

PSYC 418 Memory and Attention (3
sem. hrs.)
This course examines current models of the
human memory system, as well as practical
mnemonic aids and theoretical issues and models.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 105, 106, 201; plus 6
additional sem. hrs. of psychology. (0-0; 3-0)

PSYC 420 Adult Development and
Aging (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to the developmental tasks,
issues, and experiences common to human
development from young adulthood through old



                                                 334
age. The theories of adult development and aging;
the role of genetic and environmental factors in
aging; the effects of 324 aging on sensation and
perception, learning and cognition, personality and
adjustment; and the issues of death and
bereavement are topics examined.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 105, 106, 215; and at least
third year standing. (3-0 or 3-0)

PSYC 431 Introduction to Career
Counselling and Development (3 sem.
hrs.)
A critical introduction to the theory and practice
of career counselling. The course offers an
overview of major factors affecting career
development, examines current trends and how to
meet developing needs, and addresses the
importance of effective career counselling in the
lifelong development of the individual.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 331. (3-0 or 3-0)

PSYC 440 Psychology of Religion (3
sem. hrs.)
An application of the tools of empirical
psychology to the study of the development and
function of religious experience. This course
offers an analysis of the role of religious
experience in the human personality. Specific
religious experiences (e.g., conversion, prayer,
glossolalia, miracles) are examined with a view to
understanding their function in the normal
individual.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: RELS 470.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 105, 106, and third year
standing, or instructor’s consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

PSYC 450 Behavioural NeuroScience
(3 sem. hrs.)
An examination of the cellular organization of the
brain and the role of physiological processes in
human thought, emotion, and behaviour. The
course includes laboratory experiments on
recording bioelectric potentials in invertebrates
and humans, with an emphasis on the interactions
between physiological and psychological
processes.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: BIOL 450.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 354 and either BIOL 113,
114 or PSYC 105, 106; and 201. (0-0; 3-3)

PSYC 471 Human Neuropsychology (3
sem. hrs.)
An in-depth examination of the relationship
between brain function and psychological
processes such as spatial processing, language, and
executive functioning. Behavioral and
psychological consequences of neurological
disorders will be the focus of inquiry.

Prerequisite(s): PSYC 201, 207, 354, and 9
additional sem. hrs. in psychology. (0-0; 3-3)

PSYC 490 Personhood: An
Interdisciplinary Examination of the
Individual (3 sem. hrs.)
A consideration of the function of worldviews,
the meaning of a Christian worldview, and the
implications of a Christian worldview for the
understanding of persons and their role in modern
society. Inasmuch as contemporary worldviews
have been shaped extensively by developments in
science, as well as by historical influences from
philosophy and religion, an interdisciplinary
approach is taken.

NB: Approved as alternative to IDIS 400.
Prerequisite(s): Completion of at least 70 sem.
hrs. of university credit prior to the semester in
which this course is taken. (3-0 or 3-0)

PSYC 497, 498 Senior Thesis (3, 3 sem.
hrs.)
Under supervision of the departmental faculty,
students conduct a careful review of the literature
on a topic of their choice as well as an empirical
study of some portion of the topic. The final
written result is submitted in thesis form.

Prerequisite(s): PSYC 105, 106, 201, 322; plus 12
sem. hrs. of psychology.




                                                 335
Religious Studies
RELS 105 The Coherence of Faith (3
sem. hrs.)
An overview of the theological coherence of
Catholic dogma and doctrine. Following the
content and structure of the Apostles’ creed, this
course focuses on key theological principles,
concepts, and definitions such as Trinity,
Incarnation, personhood, immortality of the soul,
Church, relationality, heaven, purgatory, hell, sin,
and redemption.

NB: Course taught at Catholic Pacific College, an
approved TWU learning centre.
Prerequisite(s): None.

RELS 106 Sacred Scripture (3 sem.
hrs.)
An introduction to the major writings of Sacred
Scripture, with particular attention given to the
narrative of salvation, and to the major themes
and emphases of the individual texts. Emphasis is
placed on a distinctively Catholic approach to
reading scripture and its role in Christian belief
and practice.

NB: Course taught at Catholic Pacific College, an
approved TWU learning centre.
Prerequisite(s): None.

RELS 107 Doctrine and Disciplines (3
sem. hrs.)
An engagement with the central doctrines and
disciplines of Christianity as articulated in the
Catechism of the Catholic Church. Students will
consider an in-depth exposition of the traditional
teachings of the Church as handed down in the
Nicene Creed, and how these core beliefs shape
the central practices of Christian life such as the
sacraments, charitable living, and prayer.

NB: Course taught at Catholic Pacific College, an
approved TWU learning centre.
Prerequisite(s): None.

RELS 110 Introduction to Christianity
(3 sem. hrs.)
Who is Jesus Christ? What is the Bible? What does
Christianity believe and how is it relevant to my
life today? These are the broad, overarching
questions students will investigate in this course.
Students will be able to explain how the centrality
of the Gospel of Christ relates to how Christians
have understood the Bible and Christian theology.
This course provides foundational concepts that
students will be able to apply to the more complex
issues encountered in RELS 111 and 112.

Prerequisite(s): None; not open to students who
have received credit for RELS 100, 101, or 102.

RELS 111 The Old Testament: God,
Humanity, the World (3 sem. hrs.)
Religion asks foundational questions about human
existence and identity. Who am I? What can I
know about God, and does God’s existence give
my life greater meaning and purpose? How should
I regard my neighbor and the stranger? What are
my responsibilities in this world? This course
addresses these and other questions through the
lens of the Old Testament. Students will develop
skills of interpretation in order to gain insight into
its literature, history, and beliefs. Students will
learn to interpret the Old Testament contextually
and respectfully, articulating the relevance of its
theology, ethics, and spirituality for the twenty-
first century.

Prerequisite(s): RELS 110. (3-0 or 3-0)

RELS 112 The New Testament: God,
Humanity, the World (3 sem. hrs.)
Religion asks foundational questions about human
existence and identity. Who am I? What can I
know about God, and does God’s existence give
my life greater meaning and purpose? Who is
Jesus and how has his death and resurrection
redefined conceptions of human identity? This
course addresses these and other questions
through the lens of the New Testament. Students
will develop skills of interpretation in order to gain
insight into its literature, history, and beliefs.
Students will learn to interpret the New Testament
contextually and respectfully, articulating the
relevance of its theology, ethics, and spirituality
for the twenty-first century.

Prerequisite(s): RELS 110. (3-0 or 3-0)


                                                  336
RELS 160 Introduction to Theology (3
sem. hrs.)
What do Christians believe about God and what
are their grounds for holding these beliefs?
Introduction to Christian theology places
Christian theology in the broader context of
religion and invites students to consider their own
beliefs in the context of the broader Christian
theological tradition and to explore their
relationship to scripture, tradition, experience, and
reason. Students are encouraged to consider the
importance and relevance of Christian theology in
academic and ecclesial contexts with special
attention to spiritual formation.

Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0 or 3-0)

RELS 222 Israelite Religion (3 sem.
hrs.)
A study of the religious forms and institutions of
the Hebrew people during the Old Testament
period, including a consideration of the major
theological motifs that pervade the Hebrew
religion.

Prerequisite(s): RELS 111. (0-0; 3-0)

RELS 224 New Testament Theology (3
sem. hrs.)
A study of the New Testament writings in their
historical setting and chronological sequence with
the goal of acquiring knowledge of their
theological unity and diversity.

Prerequisite(s): RELS 112. (3-0; 0-0)

RELS 225 Revelation and
Interpretation (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to biblical hermeneutics focusing
upon the significance of divine revelation,
primarily as represented in the sacred scriptures of
the New Covenant. Students will be exposed to
general principles of textual interpretation,
perspectives from contemporary theological
hermeneutics, and several of the historical debates
in the reception of biblical texts, particularly
surrounding the ecumenical councils of the first
eight centuries. Students will also be encouraged
to develop a critical awareness of their
presuppositions as readers, with an aim of
engaging constructively in debates which continue
to divide Christians.

NB: Course taught at Catholic Pacific College, an
approved TWU learning centre.
Prerequisite(s): RELS 112 or 106. (3-0)

RELS 226 Gender and the Bible—
Text, Tradition, and Interpretation (3
sem. hrs.)
Focuses on issues related to gender (including
such topics as the roles and relationships of
female and male characters in the Bible) within the
contexts of the ancient Near East, Second Temple
Judaism, the Greco-Roman world, the Jesus
movement, and the early Church. Also provides
opportunity for the study and critique of the
transmission and interpretation of these traditions
within the early, medieval, Reformation, and
contemporary eras.

Prerequisite(s): RELS 111, 112. (3-0; 0-0)

RELS 235 Elementary New Testament
Greek (3 sem. hrs.)
This course comprises an introduction to
Hellenistic (Koiné) Greek that is designed to
prepare the student for reading the Greek New
Testament with linguistic aptitude, as well as
developing a cultural intelligence pertaining to the
ancient people and history that gave rise to the
biblical text. Students will explore and investigate
linguistic theories and ideas related to the script,
grammar, syntax, and vocabulary of the Greek
New Testament, as well as evaluate and compare
differences and similarities that exist between the
Ancient Greco-Roman and Jewish cultures and
our own contemporary culture.

Cross-listed: GREE 235.
Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0; 0-0)

RELS 240 Old Testament Book Study
(3 sem. hrs.)
An exegetical study of a selected Old Testament
book.

Prerequisite(s): RELS 111, 112. (3-0 or 3-0)




                                                 337
RELS 245 Elementary Biblical Hebrew
(3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to the grammar and vocabulary
of biblical Hebrew, designed to prepare the
student for serious study of the Hebrew Bible as
an item of both ancient and ongoing cultural,
historical, and theological significance.

Cross-listed: HEBR 245.
Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0; 3-0)

RELS 250 New Testament Book Study
(3 sem. hrs.)
An exegetical study of a selected New Testament
book.

Prerequisite(s): RELS 111, 112. (3-0 or 3-0)

RELS 261 Holy Spirit, Church, and
Last Things (3 sem. hrs.)
Every area of human life requires a solid
theological foundation, consisting of both an
informed understanding of Christian doctrine and
the ability to view life through the lens of
Christian commitment. By exploring three major
foci of systematic theology—the doctrines of the
Holy Spirit (pneumatology), the church
(ecclesiology), and last things (eschatology)—in
the light of Scripture, the theological heritage of
the Church, and the contemporary context, this
course seeks to develop the student’s expertise as
a theologically informed Christian for the sake of
their life and service to God.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): RELS 111 or 112; RELS 160. (3-
0 or 3-0)

RELS 271 Western World Religions (3
sem. hrs.)
An analytical and critical study of the phenomena,
the conceptual patterns, and the sacred texts of
some of the major Western religions. Each
religion is studied as a total perspective for life,
which is embodied in interpersonal and communal
life, in cult, and in ideology. This course provides
a general introduction to the study of world
religions as well as an historical and structural
survey of Judaism, Islam, Christianity, and new
religions in the West. The subject matter is
approached from an emic anthropological
standpoint—that is, the history, belief and practice
of each religious group will be examined in detail,
as if the student was living within that religious
context.

Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0; 0-0)

RELS 272 Eastern World Religions (3
sem. hrs.)
An analytical and critical study of the phenomena,
the conceptual patterns, and the sacred texts of
some of the major Eastern religions. Each religion
is studied as a total perspective for life, which is
embodied in interpersonal and communal life, in
cult, and in ideology. This course provides a
general introduction to the study of world
religions as well as an historical and structural
survey of Animism, Hinduism, Buddhism,
Confucianism, Taoism, and Sikhism. The subject
matter is approached from an emic
anthropological standpoint—that is, the history,
belief and practice of each religious group will be
examined in detail, as if the student was living
within that religious context.

Prerequisite(s): None. (0-0; 3-0)

RELS 275 Vatican I to Today
A critical survey of the teachings of Vatican I,
Catholic social thought, Vatican II, Humanae
Vitae, and recent papal encyclicals. This course
evaluates the Catholic Church’s engagement with
late modern global society and considers the
challenges posed to the Church’s ongoing
relevance in diverse social contexts.

NB: Course taught at Catholic Pacific College, an
approved TWU learning centre.
Prerequisite(s): RELS 105 or 107. (3-0; 0-0)

RELS 285 Introduction to Missions (3
sem. hrs.)
This course introduces basic concepts in
missiology. Foundational notions from Old
Testament and New Testament theology of
missions are explored. As well, this course
considers the rise and development of the
missionary movement from apostolic times to the
present. Issues arising from applied anthropology
as it relates to cross-cultural communication are


                                                338
also developed. Special emphasis is given to
discussion of important trends and select
strategies in contemporary world mission.

Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0 or 3-0)

RELS 296 Interacting with Western
Worldviews (3 sem. hrs.)
An evaluation of Christianity’s dependence on
modernity, the contributions of worldviews that
shape our world, contributions of the
Enlightenment period, responses of religious
pluralism and postmodernism in the quest for a
new cosmology as well as Gnosticism in the
history of Christian thought, and particularly in
the New Age movement and in creation
spirituality.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): At least second year standing. (0-
0; 3-0)

RELS 300 Principles of Biblical
Interpretation (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of the principles of biblical interpretation
used in both the Jewish and Christian traditions,
including the application of these methods to the
major literary genres of the Bible.

Prerequisite(s): RELS 111, 112. (3-0; 0-0)

RELS 311 History of Ancient Israel (3
sem. hrs.)
A study of the various eras of the history of the
Hebrew people in the Old Testament period,
including a survey of attempted historical
reconstructions. Attention is given to such
features as pre-history, nationalism, government,
and social institutions.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): RELS 111. (3-0; 0-0)

RELS 320 Dead Sea Scrolls (3 sem.
hrs.)
A survey of the literary, social, cultural, political,
and religious contexts of the Dead Sea Scrolls
(DSS) and their role in recovering the historical
development of the Hebrew Bible/Old Testament
and early Jewish and Christian identities in
antiquity.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): RELS 111, 112. (3-0 or 3-0)

RELS 322 Tracing the World views in
the Biblical Story: A Reformational
Perspective (3 sem. hrs.)
This course explores the beliefs and concepts that
shaped the thoughts and actions of biblical
authors, how people have viewed their
relationship to God and the world during the
course of the history of redemption, and world
views in the biblical text, as well as the biblical
story of redemption and its implications for today.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): RELS 111, 112 (or equivalent);
third or fourth year standing. (3-0; 0-0)

RELS 329 Elementary New Testament
Greek (3 sem. hrs.)
A continuing study of Koine Greek that is
designed to prepare the student for reading the
Greek New Testament.

Cross-listed: GREE 329.
Prerequisite(s): GREE/RELS 235. (3-0; 3-0)

RELS 331, 332 Readings in the Greek
New Testament (3, 3 sem. hrs.)
A reading of selected texts from the New
Testament, including a study of Greek syntax and
an introduction to exegetical methodology.
Students are also introduced to the reading of
ancient manuscript.

Cross-listed: GREE 331, 332.
Prerequisite(s): GREE/RELS 235, 329.
GREE/RELS 331 is a prerequisite for RELS 332.
(3-0; 3-0)

RELS 336 Elementary Biblical Hebrew
(3 sem. hrs.)
A continuing study of the grammar and
vocabulary of biblical Hebrew, designed to
prepare the student for serious reading and study
of the Hebrew Bible.




                                                  339
Cross-listed: HEBR 336.
Prerequisite(s): HEBR/RELS 245. (3-0; 3-0)

RELS 337, 338 Readings in the
Hebrew Bible (3, 3 sem. hrs.)
A reading of selected texts from the Hebrew
Bible, including a study of Hebrew syntax and an
introduction to exegetical methodology.

Cross-listed: HEBR 337, 338.
Prerequisite(s): RELS 245, 336. RELS 337 is a
prerequisite for RELS 338. (3-0; 3-0)

RELS 340 Current Issues in Biblical
Theology (3 sem. hrs.)
An examination of the topics currently being
discussed in biblical theology, such as the
possibility and methodology of a biblical theology,
apocalyptic and eschatology, covenant and
election, redemption and freedom, worship,
church, the righteousness of God, history, society,
law and gospel, faith, canon, life and death,
suffering, creation, atonement and reconciliation,
sin and guilt, wisdom, and worldview.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): RELS 111, 112. (0-0; 3-0)

RELS 341 The Pentateuch (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of the first five books of the Hebrew
Bible with special reference to introduction,
exegesis, and history. Attention is given to their
historical and theological significance for both
Judaism and Christianity.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): RELS 111, 112. (0-0; 3-0)

RELS 342 Psalms and Wisdom
Literature (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to the place, function, and form
of the Psalms and wisdom literature within the
context of other ancient Near Eastern literature,
including an analysis of selected examples such as
Job, Ecclesiastes, and Proverbs.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): RELS 111, 112. (0-0; 3-0)
RELS 343 Issues in Contemporary
Culture (3 sem. hrs.)
This course examines a number of significant
issues currently under discussion by both
academics and thinking people in western culture
in the light of key biblical texts relating to them.
Issues will include postmodernism, relativism,
pluralism, and cultural diversity, tolerance, truth,
euthanasia, stem cell research and the perceived
connection between violence and religion.

RELS 350 Biblical Archaeology (3 sem.
hrs.)
A three-week tour of Israel and/or Greece, for the
purpose of studying ancient sites and current
excavations relating to biblical studies.

NB: Offered during summer sessions only.
Prerequisite(s): RELS 111, 112.

RELS 351 Life and Teaching of Jesus
(3 sem. hrs.)
A study of the life of Jesus through the eyes of the
four evangelists, with special reference to Jesus’
teaching on God, man, the Kingdom,
righteousness, and prayer. An evaluation of the
extra-biblical view of the person of Jesus. Students
are also introduced to the major issues and topics
discussed over the last centuries of historical Jesus
research.

Prerequisite(s): RELS 111, 112. (3-0; 0-0)

RELS 352 Life and Letters of Paul (3
sem. hrs.)
A study of the world, life, and mission of Paul,
including an analysis of the central message of the
Pauline epistles in their historical setting and
chronological order.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): RELS 111, 112. (0-0; 3-0)

RELS 355 Aramaic (3 sem. hrs.)
Basic grammar. An introduction to Aramaic
literature by reading passages of the Aramaic
sections of Daniel and Ezra and selections from
post-biblical Aramaic.

Prerequisite(s): RELS 245 and 336. (0-0; 3-0)



                                                 340
RELS 360 Christian Apologetics (3
sem. hrs.)
A study of the nature and methods of defending
the Christian faith including an examination of the
evidence for and the arguments against a Christian
worldview.

Prerequisite(s): RELS 111, 112; PHIL 105, 106;
or instructor’s consent. (0-0; 3-0)

RELS 361 History of Christianity I (3
sem. hrs.)
A study of the history of the Christian Church
from the turn of the first century to the eve of the
sixteenth century Reformation with attention to
the persons, events, and issues involved in the
major developments of Christianity.

Cross-listed: HIST 361.
Prerequisite(s): HIST 111. (3-0; 0-0)

RELS 362 History of Christianity II (3
sem. hrs.)
An examination of the development of the
Christian Church from the late medieval period
through to the early twenty-first century. Key
topics include: the Protestant and Catholic
Reformations; the Great Awakenings and the rise
of modern Evangelicalism, Fundamentalism, and
the growth of modern missionary movements,
along with a consideration of significant
individuals, changes in theology, institutions,
devotional practices, gender roles, and attempts to
engage and shape culture.

Cross-listed: HIST 362.
Prerequisite(s): HIST 112. (0-0; 3-0)

RELS 364 The Expansion of
Christianity in the Two-thirds World (3
sem. hrs.)
The expansion of Christianity in the non-Western
world from the first century to the present.
Attention is given to critiquing those factors that
hindered or enhanced the expansion of
Christianity during specific eras.

Prerequisite(s): RELS 285 or instructor’s
consent. (3-0 or 3-0)
RELS 365 Christian Moral Theology (3
sem. hrs.)
Moral theology reflects upon the goodness and
evil of human acts, and of the person who
performs them, in the light of Divine Revelation
and human reason. This course offers an
introduction both to mainstream Catholic and
evangelical moral theology and contemporary
moral issues, emphasizing their common ground
and supplementary insights as well as explaining
their continuing points of divergence. The course
is taught by a Catholic professor, utilizing both
Catholic and protestant texts. Specific moral issues
to be discussed include abortion, homosexuality,
“just war,” contraception, divorce, euthanasia,
poverty and hunger, and the nature and role of the
family.

NB: Course taught at Catholic Pacific College, an
approved TWU learning centre.
Prerequisite(s): RELS 160 or instructor’s
consent. (3-0; 0-0)

RELS 366 Theology of the Body (3
sem. hrs.)
This course reviews the roots and evolution of the
modern secular approaches to anthropology and
human sexuality and contrast them with those of
Christ. This course examines recent developments
in theological reflection on the body (John Paul
II’s theology of the body) and provides a general
introduction to Christian anthropology, with
particular attention to themes such as creation in
the imago Dei, fall and redemption, nature and
grace, freedom and rationality, gender, and
vocation. Due note of convergent and divergent
doctrinal positions held by various Christian
traditions of the themes are reviewed.

NB: Course taught at Catholic Pacific College, an
approved TWU learning centre.
Prerequisite(s): RELS 160. (0-0; 3-0)

RELS 367 The Catholic Church Past
and Present (3 sem. hrs.)
Examines key events in the history of the Catholic
Church to posit how Catholic theology might
shape one’s view of history, to consider how an
understanding of history might be relevant to
faith, and to investigate how the Catholic Church
has developed and adapted as a protagonist in


                                                341
history. Topics include the ecumenical councils,
monasticism, Holy Roman empire, Crusades,
East-West schism, inquisition, Reformation,
Council of Trent, the effects of the French
Revolution, rise of nationalism, Vatican II, and
globalism.

NB: Course taught at Catholic Pacific College, an
approved TWU learning centre.
Prerequisite(s): None.

RELS 368 The Reformation (3 sem.
hrs.)
An examination of European life during the
sixteenth century reformations. This course
includes discussions of sin and wholeness, of
religion and secular power, of toleration and social
order, and of efforts to reform the church and
society, and an examination of the place of ritual
in social life, life in the family, and attitudes to
gender.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: HIST 308.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history, including
one of HIST 107, 111, 112, or 362; or instructor’s
consent. (0-0; 3-0)

RELS 371 Sociology of Religion (3
sem. hrs.)
An introduction to the theories and concepts
utilized by sociologists to interpret religious
behaviour and the organization of religion.

Cross-listed: SOCI 331.
Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0; 0-0)

RELS 372 Contemporary Catholic
Theology of the Love of God (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course traces the theme of the merciful love
of God in Scripture and Catholic Tradition,
especially in the writings of St. Thomas Aquinas,
St. Catherine of Siena, St. Therese of Lisieux, St.
Faustina Kowalska, and Pope John Paul II, as well
as in the Catechism of the Catholic Church. The
Mercy of God is presented as a central vantage
point from which to view more clearly many
important elements of Catholic doctrine and
spirituality, ethics, and a common springboard for
Catholic-Evangelical ecumenism—in other words,
the contemporary Catholic world view. (This is
not a course in Catholic apologetics or polemics.)

NB: Course taught at Catholic Pacific College, an
approved TWU learning centre.
Prerequisite(s): RELS 160. (0-0; 3-0)

RELS 375 The Christian Apologetics
of C.S. Lewis (3 sem. hrs.)
This course provides a detailed study of the
theological and apologetic writings of C.S. Lewis.
The instructor presents the Christian world view
of Lewis, as well as limitations and problems that
may be inherent in his theological vision. The
relevance of Lewis’ writings to the task of
ecumenical theological dialogue is a recurrent
theme.

NB: Course taught at Catholic Pacific College, an
approved TWU learning centre.
Prerequisite(s): RELS 160 or equivalent with
instructor’s consent. (0-0; 3-0)

RELS 377 Religion in the USA (3 sem.
hrs.)
Religious developments in the USA from the
beginning of European settlement to today. The
course examines the relationship between such
developments and the political, economic, and
social life of the country, as well as the Great
Awakenings and the Modernist/Fundamentalist
controversy.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: HIST 347.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history. (0-0; 3-0)

RELS 378 Religion in Canada (3 sem.
hrs.)
Religious developments in Canada from the
beginning of European settlement to today. The
course examines the relationship between such
developments and the political, economic, and
social life of the country.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: HIST 348.
Prerequisite(s): Any two of HIST 235, 236, 361,
362. (0-0; 3-0)




                                                 342
RELS 380 Cross-Cultural/Missions
Practicum (2 or 3 sem. hrs.)
A supervised short-term missions/cross-cultural
internship/practicum.

NB: Open only to Inter-Cultural Religious Studies
majors or minors.

RELS 381 Contemporary Christianity
(3 sem. hrs.)
Students are invited to investigate some of the
most significant theologians and theologies of the
nineteenth, twentieth, and twenty-first centuries
with a view toward how they influence
Christianity today. The approach is both inter-
confessional and international in scope and seeks
to allow students to grapple with important
theological issues in local, national, and global
contexts.

Prerequisite(s): Two of RELS 111, 112, or 160.
(3-0; 0-0)

RELS 382 The Catholic Church:
Theology and Practice (3 sem. hrs.)
This course focuses on the theological, liturgical,
and spiritual traditions that undergird the Catholic
Church and which continue to form her self-
understanding. Historically, this course explains
and evaluates the development of the Catholic
doctrine of the Church in terms of its roots in
Scripture and Tradition, and with a particular
emphasis on the Pauline understanding of the
Church as the Body of Christ, and selected
readings from the Church Fathers, as well as
developments in Catholic understanding of the
Church in different historical periods and social
contexts. It also examines the Church in terms of
her ongoing mission to the contemporary world
implied by Catholic doctrine. Spiritually, this
course exams the distinctive teaching of the
Second Vatican Council’s “universal call to
holiness” which ultimately serves to integrate
doctrine and life in each member of the Church.
Analysis of these themes is undertaken in dialogue
with the perspectives of other Christian traditions,
and in the light of the constructive critique they
can offer.

NB: Course taught at Catholic Pacific College, an
approved TWU learning centre.
Prerequisite(s): RELS 160.

RELS 383 Reason and Belief in God (3
sem. hrs.)
A survey of central issues arising from the
question, “Is belief in God rational?” Topics
include arguments concerning the existence of
God, religious pluralism, natural science and
religious belief, religious language, and critiques of
natural theology from Kierkegaard and Reformed
Epistemology.

Cross-listed: PHIL 383.
Prerequisite(s): 3 sem. hrs. of philosophy or
third year standing. (3-0; 3-0)

RELS 384 Religion, Contextualization,
and Culture Change (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of the history of contextualization from
biblical to modern times, exploring significant
models and paradigms of prominent thinkers and
evaluating these adaptations and innovations.
Also, the social and spiritual dynamics of culture
change are examined, with a view to analyzing
those processes that help to make the Gospel
relevant in the constantly changing world in which
we live.

Prerequisite(s): RELS 285. (3-0 or 3-0)

RELS 385 Suffering and Belief in God
(3 sem. hrs.)
An examination of key issues pertaining to
suffering and belief in God. Topics include the
problem of evil, arguments from suffering,
original sin, everlasting suffering, and providence.

Cross-listed: PHIL 384.
Prerequisite(s): 3 sem. hrs. of philosophy or
third year standing. (3-0; 3-0)

RELS 386 Global Theologies (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course seeks to extend the study of theology
to the manner in which non-Western communities
of Christians endeavour to shape their world by
their faith. Special emphasis is given to examining
Christology and Soteriology from a cross-cultural
perspective and to the manner by which both
Western and non-Western traditions may interact



                                                  343
to enrich hermeneutics, missiology, and biblical
and systematic theology.

Prerequisite(s): RELS 285 or instructor’s
consent. (0-0; 3-0)

RELS 387 Christian Theology in
Ecumenical Dialogue (3 sem. hrs.)
A survey and analysis of the main achievements of
the ecumenical theological dialogue process
among the Christian churches, and the significant
challenges still facing that dialogue today. This
course utilizes texts from Catholic, Protestant
Evangelical, Eastern Orthodox, and Anglican
sources, and guest lecturers from Catholic,
Evangelical, and Orthodox traditions.

NB: Course taught at Catholic Pacific College, an
approved TWU learning centre.
Prerequisite(s): RELS 160. (0-0; 3-0)

RELS 388 Liturgy and Sacraments (3
sem. hrs.)
Introduces students to the significance and
variations of embodied engagements with the
Christian mysteries. Drawing upon liturgical
experience, sacramental engagement, and liturgical
and sacramental theology, students will consider
definitions of the sacramental, the role of
particular sacraments, how the sacraments affect
the experience of God, the pedagogical nature of
liturgy, and the influence of liturgy and the
sacraments both inside and outside of the Church.

NB: Course taught at Catholic Pacific College, an
approved TWU learning centre.
Prerequisite(s): RELS 160 or instructor’s
consent. (3-0; 0-0)

RELS 395 Being in Christ: Christian
Spiritual Traditions (3 sem. hrs.)
An experience of Christian spiritual traditions
through two primary ways of knowing: historical
and archival as well as experiential and embodied.
Students will investigate the history of Christian
spiritual traditions in order to develop a
foundational understanding of spirituality as
practiced throughout Christian history, and will
also learn to creatively apply their knowledge of
spiritual practice to a life of “skillful Christian
living.”
Prerequisite(s): RELS 111 and 112; and one of
RELS 160, 271, or 272.

RELS 398 Radical Religion in the
Sixteenth to Eighteenth Centuries (3
sem. hrs.)
This course examines radical Christian movements
from the Reformation period to the early
Enlightenment, including sixteenth century
Anabaptism, German Spiritualism, radical German
Pietism and American Pietism, early English
Separatism, radical Puritanism, the Levellers, early
Baptists, the Philadelphian movement, and the
Methodist movement. Class time is divided
between lectures and seminar discussion of
primary source readings.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: HIST 398.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of history including
HIST 107, 111, 112; or 362. (0-0; 3-0)

RELS 399 Catholic Spirituality in the
Modern World (3 sem. hrs.)
An analysis of the teachings on prayer and the
devout life of Catholic spiritual writers whose
teachings still enrich the life of the Church today:
especially St. Theresa of Avila, St. John of the
Cross, St. Bernard of Clairvaux, St. Bonaventure,
St. Francis De Sales, St. Therese of Lisieux, and
the Venerable John Henry Newman. This course
includes an overview of controversial topics such
as the rise of “Centering Prayer,” the “New Age”
movement, and an analysis of the teachings of the
Catechism of the Catholic Church, and reflections
on the Catholic Tradition of Spirituality from non-
Catholic perspectives.

NB: Course taught at Catholic Pacific College, an
approved TWU learning centre.
Prerequisite(s): RELS 160, or equivalent with
instructor’s permission. (3-0; 0-0)

RELS 400, 480 Directed Studies (3, 3
sem. hrs.)
Independent but guided research in a specialized
area of interest to the student.

NB: RELS 400 designates biblical content
courses; RELS 480 designates theological/cultural
emphases.


                                                344
Prerequisite(s): Consent of department chair.

RELS 415 Intertestamental Literature
(3 sem. hrs.)
A study of the intertestamental Judaic literature,
noting the relationships between this literature and
the Old Testament and New Testament and
showing how this literature serves as an important
background for the study of the New Testament
documents.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): RELS 111, 112. (3-0; 0-0)

RELS 423 Apocalyptic Literature (3
sem. hrs.)
A study of the origin, form, and function of
apocalyptic literature as well as important motifs
and themes.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): RELS 111, 112. (3-0; 0-0)

RELS 425 Pauline Theology (3 sem.
hrs.)
A survey of the general contours of Paul’s
thinking and a closer examination of one
particular aspect of his theology, such as the
origins of his gospel, the problem of coherence
and contingency, his apostleship, his missionary
strategy, his Christology, or the theology of one of
his letters.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): RELS 111, 112. (0-0; 3-0)

RELS 430 The New Testament and
the Greco-Roman World (3 sem. hrs.)
An investigation of the interface between the New
Testament and the Greco-Roman world, with an
emphasis on the literary, documentary, and
archeological sources for such an investigation.
Readings in extra-biblical Greek sources are a
regular feature of the course.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): RELS 111, 112, 235, 329 (or
concurrent enrolment therein). (0-0; 3-0)
RELS 446 Hebrew Prophets (3 sem.
hrs.)
An introduction to the origin, function, and
meaning of the Hebrew prophets through a survey
of the prophetic writings of the Hebrew Bible,
including a discussion of the relationship to the
historical periods in which they were composed
and their theological significance within Judaism
and Christianity.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): RELS 111, 112. (0-0; 3-0)

RELS 448 Ancient Near East and the
Old Testament (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of selected ancient Near Eastern texts and
their relevance for the exegesis of the Old
Testament.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): RELS 111, 112. (0-0; 3-0)

RELS 449 Old Testament Seminar (3
sem. hrs.)
This course is a study of selected topics that are
currently under examination in the field of Old
Testament studies.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): RELS 111, 112 and third or
fourth year standing. (3-0; 0-0)

RELS 453 The Synoptic Gospels and
Acts (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of the Gospels of Matthew, Mark, and
Luke, focusing on the gospel form and the
message of the individual gospels in their
historical context. In addition, the Acts of the
Apostles is considered with a view to better
understanding the Church’s birth and expansion.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): RELS 111, 112. (3-0; 0-0)

RELS 454 Writings and Theology of
John (3 sem. hrs.)
An introductory study of the major historical and
literary problems of the writings traditionally
ascribed to John: the Gospel of John, Johannine



                                                 345
Epistles, and the Book of Revelation. In addition,
attention is given to their thought and symbolism.

Prerequisite(s): RELS 111, 112. (0-0; 3-0)

RELS 456 New Testament Seminar (3
sem. hrs.)
A study of selected topics that are currently under
examination in the field of New Testament
studies.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): RELS 111, 112, and third or
fourth year standing. (0-0; 3-0)

RELS 460 Current Issues and Trends
in Missions (3 sem. hrs.)
Current missiological themes are studied such as:
Missio Dei, Salvation Today, social justice and
mission, meaning of evangelism and
evangelization, contextualization, liberation
themes, missions as inculturation, missions as an
ecumenical expression, mobilizing the laity for
missions, missions as a theology, and missions as
an eschatological hope. The course also examines
shifting missiological paradigms within the
Conciliar Movement and Evangelical responses.

Prerequisite(s): RELS 111, 112, 285. (3-0 or 3-0)

RELS 465 Influential Thinkers in the
Christian Tradition (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to some seminal figures in the
Christian tradition. The course investigates their
thought and intellectual contributions within their
socio-political context and experience.

Prerequisite(s): RELS 111, 112, 160. (3-0 or 3-0)

RELS 466 The Church Fathers (3 sem.
hrs.)
An introduction to the Fathers of the early
Church. The course covers the Fathers from the
latter half of the first century CE to the Orthodox
writings of St. John of Damascene (ca. 750).
Attention is paid to the historical and intellectual
contexts within which the Fathers lived and
taught, and special attention is given to each one’s
unique theological contribution to the
development of Christian Orthodoxy—both East
and West.

Prerequisite(s): RELS 160 or HIST/RELS 361.
(3-0 or 3-0)

RELS 467 The Theology of Karl Barth
(3 sem. hrs.)
This course is an examination and deeper
understanding of Karl Barth’s theology. Primary
attention is given to the character, development,
and significance of Barth’s theology. The student
also reads Karl Barth in the context of Christian
thought.

Prerequisite(s): RELS 160, 361, and 362; RELS
381 recommended. (0-0; 3-0)

RELS 470 Psychology of Religion (3
sem. hrs.)
An application of the tools of empirical
psychology to the study of the development and
function of religious experience. An analysis of the
role of religious experience in the human
personality. Specific religious experiences (e.g.,
conversion, prayer, glossolalia, miracles) are
examined with a view to understanding their
function in the normal individual.

Cross-listed: PSYC 440.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 105, 106, and third year
standing, or instructor’s consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

RELS 473 The Theology of Thomas
Aquinas and John Paul II (3 sem. hrs.)
This course takes an in-depth look at the
theological vision of the two most influential
Catholic theologians of the second Christian
millennium: St. Thomas Aquinas and Pope John
Paul II. The main features of St. Thomas’s
synthesis of Christian thought, especially as found
in his great Summa Theologiae, is explored. This
is followed by an examination of the “personalist”
Thomism of Pope John Paul II, and his program
for the renewal of the Catholic Faith, especially as
found in selected encyclicals and apostolic letters.
The vision and worldview of St. Thomas Aquinas
and John Paul II are presented as significant and
enduring achievements of Christian thought.




                                                346
NB: Course taught at Catholic Pacific College, an
approved TWU learning centre.
Prerequisite(s): RELS 160 or equivalent with
permission of instructor. (3-0; 0-0)

RELS 475 Christianity and Culture (3
sem. hrs.)
How do Christians past and present relate to
culture? Students are invited to examine some
important aspects of Christianity’s involvement in
Western culture. Alternative models and historical
examples of this involvement are considered as
well as some specific current issues related to
Christian cultural activity.

Prerequisite(s): RELS 111, 112. (3-0 or 3-0)

RELS 476 Theology and Worldview (3
sem. hrs.)
What is Worldview in relation to Theology? How
does it influence us and others? Students are
invited to investigate some of the salient moments
in the history of Christian worldview thinking and
its contemporary expressions as they relate to the
discipline of theology. We will inquire into
implications of this relationship in various spheres
of life, including politics, art, science, and the
environment. Students will consider responses to
the various expressions of Christian theology in
contemporary pluralist society with a view
understanding how it affects relationships in
society and the world.

Prerequisite(s): RELS 160. (0-0; 3-0)

RELS 477 New Testament Canon:
Development and Theology (3 sem.
hrs.)
Investigates the theological implications of the
historical development of the New Testament
canon. Stress is laid upon the contextual reading
of primary source evidence and its interpretation
in important secondary source literature. New
Testament canon development is explored as it
relates to the Rule of Faith, the early councils,
creeds, and the church fathers. These relationships
are then investigated with a view toward how they
influence our understanding of Scripture in the
twenty-first century.
Prerequisite(s): RELS 160 or HIST/RELS 361
or 362. (0-0; 3-0)

RELS 478 Atonement Theology in
Contemporary Context (3 sem. hrs.)
An exploration into the doctrine of the
atonement, both in its historical and
contemporary settings. This course explores how
the cross is God’s answer to human sin and
oppression, and also discusses the advantages and
disadvantages of the traditional atonement models
and the implications of atonement theology for
the Church and contemporary society.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): RELS 111, 112, 160. (0-0; 3-0)

RELS 482 Historical Perspectives on
Reformation and Post-Reformation
Thought (3 sem. hrs.)
A re-evaluation of the issues involved in the origin
of the sixteenth century Protestant Reformation
and the subsequent development of Calvinist
thought: justification by faith, covenant theology,
and election. An analysis of why Calvinists and
Arminians were unable to overcome their
differences, and how Reformed scholasticism
went beyond John Calvin’s insights.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: HIST 482.
Prerequisite(s): RELS 111, 112, and 160; and at
least third year standing; or instructor’s consent.
(3-0; 0-0)

RELS 483 The Evidential Force of
Religious Experience (3 sem. hrs.)
Examines the place of evidence in religion and
assesses the evidential force of religious
experience. Such experiences as near-death,
visions, conversions, mystical states of
consciousness, and other topics that have been the
focus of ongoing public attention are discussed.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: PHIL 483.
Prerequisite(s): Third year standing and 6 sem.
hrs. of philosophy or instructor’s consent. (3-0 or
3-0)




                                                347
RELS 488 Special Topics in Missiology
(3 sem. hrs.)
An examination of special topics or issues in
Missiology that are not considered in depth in
other courses.

Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of RELS including
RELS 285, and third or fourth year standing, or
instructor’s consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

RELS 489 Special Topics in Religious
Studies (3 sem. hrs.)
An examination of special topics or issues in
Religious Studies that are not considered in depth
in other courses.

Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of RELS courses, and
third or fourth year standing, or instructor’s
consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

RELS 490 Christianity and the Natural
Sciences (1 sem. hr.)
Presentation and discussion of special topics
concerned with the relationship between science
and the Christian faith.

Cross-listed: NATS 490.
Prerequisite(s): CMPT 480.



Religious Studies,
Graduate Courses
NB: For further information about course co-requisites,
prerequisites, and when courses are offered, see the
Graduate Program in Biblical Studies section, or contact
the Biblical Studies Graduate Program director.

Qualifying Courses
Students requiring qualifying courses may select
from the electives below, as available.

Electives:
• RELS 500 (cf. RELS 300) Principles of
   Biblical Interpretation
• RELS 511 (cf. RELS 311) History of Ancient
   Israel
•   RELS 515 (cf. RELS 415) Intertestamental
    Literature
•   RELS 520 (cf. RELS 320) Dead Sea Scrolls
•   RELS 523 (cf. RELS 423) Apocalyptic
    Literature
•   RELS 525 (cf. RELS 425) Pauline Theology
•   RELS 540 (cf. RELS 340) Current Issues in
    Biblical Theology
•   RELS 541 (cf. RELS 341) The Pentateuch
•   RELS 542 (cf. RELS 342) Psalms and
    Wisdom Literature
•   RELS 546 (cf. RELS 446) Hebrew Prophets
•   RELS 548 (cf. RELS 448) Ancient Near East
    and the Old Testament
•   RELS 549 (cf. RELS 449) Old Testament
    Seminar
•   RELS 551 (cf. RELS 351) Life and Teachings
    of Jesus
•   RELS 552 (cf. RELS 352) Life and Letters of
    Paul
•   RELS 553 (cf. RELS 453) The Synoptic
    Gospels and Acts
•   RELS 554 (cf. RELS 454) The Writings and
    Theology of John
•   RELS 556 (cf. RELS 456) New Testament
    Seminar

Language Courses:
• RELS 521, 522 (cf. LATN 211, 212) Biblical
   and Ecclesiastical Latin
• RELS 528, 529 (cf. RELS 235, 329)
   Elementary Greek
• RELS 531, 532 (cf. RELS 331, 332) Readings
   in the Greek New Testament
• RELS 545, 536 (cf. RELS 245, 336)
   Elementary Hebrew
• RELS 537, 538 (cf. RELS 337, 338) Readings
   in the Hebrew Bible

RELS 565 Influential Thinkers in the
Christian Tradition (3 sem. hr.)
An introduction to some seminal figures in the
Christian tradition. The course investigates their
thought and intellectual contributions within their
socio-political context and experience.

RELS 566 The Church Fathers (3
sem.hr.)
An introduction to the Fathers of the early
Church. The course covers the Fathers from the



                                                348
latter half of the first century CE to the Orthodox
writings of St. John of Damascene (ca. 750).
Attention is paid to the historical and intellectual
contexts within which the Fathers lived and
taught, and special attention is given to each one’s
unique theological contribution to the
development of Christian Orthodoxy—both East
and West.

RELS 567 The Theology of Karl Barth
(3 sem. hrs.)
This course is an examination and deeper
understanding of Karl Barth’s theology. Primary
attention is given to the character, development,
and significance of Barth’s theology. The student
also reads Karl Barth in the context of Christian
thought.

RELS 575 Christianity and Culture (3
sem. hrs.)
How do Christians past and present relate to
culture? Students are invited to examine some
important aspects of Christianity’s involvement in
Western culture. Alternative models and historical
examples of this involvement are considered as
well as some specific current issues related to
Christian cultural activity.

RELS 576 Christian Worldviews in
Historical and Cultural Perspective (3
sem. hr.)
What is Worldview in relation to Theology? How
does it influence us and others? Students are
invited to explore the nature and scope of
Christian worldview as we investigate some of the
salient moments in the history of Christian
worldview thinking and its contemporary
expressions. We will inquire into implications of
Christ’s lordship for various spheres of life, such
as politics, art, science, and the environment. We
investigate and develop personal responses to the
challenges for a Christian worldview in today’s
pluralist society. Students are encouraged to
analyze their own worldview in order to critically
interact with a view toward understanding how it
affects relationships in society and the world.

RELS 577 New Testament Canon:
Development and Theology (3 sem.hr.)
Investigates the theological implications of the
historical development of the New Testament
canon. Stress is laid upon the contextual reading
of primary source evidence and its interpretation
in important secondary source literature. New
Testament canon development is explored as it
relates to the Rule of Faith, the early councils,
creeds, and the church fathers. These relationships
are then investigated with a view toward how they
influence our understanding of Scripture in the
twenty-first century.

RELS 611 Advanced Old Testament
Exegesis (3 sem. hrs.)
The principles of Hebrew exegesis are reviewed
and applied to several examples of the genres
found within the Old Testament.

Prerequisite(s): A minimum of two years of
Hebrew. With the instructor’s consent, second
year Hebrew Readings may be taken as a co-
requisite.

RELS 612 Advanced Old Testament
Seminar (3 sem. hrs.)
Old Testament Seminar presupposes RELS 611
(or equivalent) and is offered every spring
semester. Seminar topics are selected from the
following: Old Testament Textual Criticism,
Genesis, Exodus, Major Prophets, Minor
Prophets, Daniel, Psalms, Chronicles and the
Rewritten Bible, Inner-Biblical Exegesis, History
of the Hebrew Bible, the Dead Sea Scrolls and the
Hebrew Bible, and Old Testament Theology.
Among other things, students are asked to
research and report on various aspects of the
seminar topic. One of the purposes of the course
is to acquaint students with current issues in the
field and to encourage the development of critical
thinking.

RELS 621 Advanced New Testament
Exegesis (3 sem. hrs.)
The principles of Greek exegesis are reviewed and
applied to several examples of the genres found
within the New Testament.

Prerequisite(s): A minimum of two years of
Greek. With the instructor’s consent, second year
Greek Readings may be taken as a co-requisite.



                                                349
RELS 622 Advanced New Testament
Seminar (3 sem. hrs.)
New Testament Seminar presupposes RELS 621
(or equivalent) and is offered every spring
semester. Seminar topics are selected from the
following: Matthew, Luke-Acts, Prison Epistles,
Hebrews, Old Testament Apocrypha and
Pseudepigrapha, Apocryphal Gospels and the
New Testament, the Septuagint and the New
Testament, the Dead Sea Scrolls and the New
Testament, the Targums and the New Testament,
Anti-Semitism and the New Testament, and New
Testament Theology. Students are asked to
research various aspects of the seminar topic and
report back to the seminar. One of the purposes
of the course is to acquaint students with current
issues in the field and to encourage the
development of critical thinking.

RELS 631 The Deuteronomistic
History (3 sem. hrs.)
This course reviews the emergence, aims, and
interpretive techniques of the Deuteronomistic
history, including the (re)interpretation of Mosaic,
conquest and royal traditions. Of special interest is
the presentation of the founding and confirming
of the Davidic dynasty.

RELS 632 Historical Jesus (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course reviews several of the most promising
recent developments in Jesus research. Sources,
the criteria of authenticity, Jesus’ contemporaries,
and Jesus’ understanding of the Kingdom receive
emphasis. Special attention is given to the Dead
Sea Scrolls and their relevance for Jesus research.

RELS 633 Themes of the Pentateuch
(3 sem. hrs.)
This course reviews the principal themes of the
Pentateuch, emphasizing the presentation of
Yahweh as Creator and covenant Maker. Critical
interpretation of the Pentateuch, including the
classic statement of the Documentary Hypothesis,
is assessed.

RELS 634 Mark (3 sem. hrs.)
This course reviews recent research in the Gospel
of Mark as it pertains to Mark’s community and its
interpretation of the Jesus tradition, as well as to
the question of the historicity of Mark’s
presentation of the story of Jesus.

RELS 640 Advanced Greek Readings
(3 sem. hrs.)
This course exposes students to a variety of Greek
texts that are important for understanding the
language and literature of the Greek New
Testament. These texts include the Septuagint,
papyri, inscriptions, and various extra-biblical
writings such as the apocryphal gospels. Students
are led to appreciate the literary conventions and
genres of the Greco-Roman world.

RELS 641 Isaiah (3 sem. hrs.)
This course reviews the historical prophet Isaiah
and the political circumstances in which he lived.
It also considers the subsequent formation of the
Book of Isaiah, including its various components
and perspectives, its unified message and various
features of inner-interpretation.

RELS 642 Romans (3 sem. hrs.)
This course explores the nature of Paul’s
argument in his letter to the Roman Christians,
with special emphasis on the apostle’s scriptural
defence of the Christian gospel and his
understanding of the relationship of Gentiles to
Israel.

RELS 643 Psalms (3 sem. hrs.)
This course examines the Psalms as the primary
window into Israel’s worship, especially during the
pre-exilic period. Features of both corporate and
individual faith are brought to light.

RELS 644 John (3 sem. hrs.)
This course reviews the various questions of
sources, relationship to the Synoptic Gospels,
Christology, use of the Old Testament, religious
background, and early Jewish/Christian polemic.

RELS 645 Wisdom Literature (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course offers an analysis of the biblical and
intertestamental wisdom literature with a special
emphasis on the Book of Ecclesiastes, i.e.
Qohelet.




                                                 350
Prerequisite(s): Knowledge of Hebrew (RELS
245 and 336.)

RELS 647 The Dead Sea Scrolls (3
sem. hrs.)
This course surveys the Dead Sea Scrolls and the
light they shed on Second Temple Judaism and
early Christianity. Themes of major sectarian
scrolls are studied; recently published scrolls and
fragments are evaluated.

RELS 648 Advanced Greek Studies (3
sem. hrs.)
This course introduces students to various
technical features involved in the study of New
Testament Greek. These studies include treatment
of aspects of advanced Greek grammar, textual
criticism, the influence of the Septuagint on the
New Testament, the literary and linguistic
influence of literary Greek on the New Testament,
and the relevance of Greek study for New
Testament exegesis.

RELS 649 Rabbinic Literature (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course introduces the student to the most
important rabbinic writings (e.g., Mishnah,
Talmud, and the Midrashim). Sessions consist of
readings and introductory lectures concerned with
the origin and editing of this literature, its
purposes, and the types of scriptural and logical
arguments employed. Selected writings are studied
in greater depth; depending on the makeup of the
class, some passages are read in Hebrew and
others in English.

RELS 650 Introduction to Biblical
Archaeology (3 sem. hrs.)
This course is scheduled as the summer session
study tour of Israel (cf. RELS 350). It offers
students the opportunity to study important
topographical and archaeological sites, including
digs in progress, and to view several important
finds in the Israel National Museum.

RELS 652 Syriac (3 sem. hrs.)
The course offers students an introduction to
Syriac. Although the emphasis falls on the
Peshitta, students are exposed to other Syriac
writings.
Prerequisite(s): A minimum of 6 sem. hrs. of
Hebrew and may, at the instructor’s discretion,
require a minimum of 3 to 6 sem. hrs. of Aramaic.

RELS 655 Introduction to Aramaic (3
sem. hrs.)
This course, which presupposes a minimum of 6
sem. hrs. of Biblical Hebrew, offers students an
introduction to Biblical, Qumranic, and Targumic
Aramaic.

RELS 656 Readings in Aramaic (3
sem. hrs.)
This course, which presupposes RELS 655, guides
students through selected readings in Biblical,
Qumranic, and Targumic Aramaic.

RELS 658 Mishnaic and Qumranic
Hebrew (3 sem. hrs.)
This course, which presupposes a minimum of 6
sem. hrs. of Hebrew, offers students an
introduction to Mishnaic and Qumranic Hebrew
and guides students through selected readings.

RELS 660 Biblical Interpretation in the
Sixteenth Century (3 sem. hrs.)
This course introduces students to the principles
and practice of Biblical interpretation during the
Reformation period. Of special interest are the
commentaries and scriptural arguments in support
of important doctrines.

RELS 661 History of Christian
Doctrine (3 sem. hrs.)
An exploration of the interactions between
Christian thought, practice, and culture. While not
exhaustive in nature, the course seeks to
familiarize students with major doctrines and
thinkers in the history of Christian thought
through an engagement with primary and
secondary source material.

RELS 662 Early & Medieval Christian
Thought (3 sem. hrs.)
An examination of the emergence and
development of Christian thought from the
Apostolic Fathers through to St. Thomas Aquinas.
Building on the foundation laid by RELS 661
(History of Christian Doctrine), this course invites
students into a deeper understanding of the


                                                351
complexities of early and medieval Christian
thought through close readings of primary source
material from significant individuals and councils.

RELS 663 Reformation Thought (3
sem. hrs.)
An examination of the emergence and
development of Christian thought of the
Magisterial and Anabaptist wings of sixteenth
century Reformation. This course invites students
into a deeper understanding of the complexities of
Reformation thought through close readings of
primary source material from significant
individuals, movements and councils.

RELS 664 Modern Christian Thought
(3 sem. hrs.)
An examination of the emergence and
development of Christian thought of the
nineteenth, twentieth, & twenty-first centuries.
This course invites students into a deeper
understanding of the complexities of modern
Christian thought through close readings of
primary source material from significant
theologies and theologians of the period with a
view to how they influence Christianity today. The
approach is both inter-confessional and
international in scope and seeks to allow students
to grapple with important theological issues in
local, national, and global contexts.

Co-requisite(s): RELS 611, 612, 661.

RELS 670 Pre-Nicene Christianity (3
sem. hrs.)
A detailed examination of the background and
development of Christian thought and life in the
period spanning the Apostolic Fathers through to
the Council of Nicaea (325). The course analyzes
the complex formulation of Pre-Nicene
Christianity through the writings of some of its
most influential thinkers, leaders, and movements
(both orthodox and heretical) with an eye toward
identifying major developments in early Christian
theology and practice. An attempt is also made to
understand the variety of Christianities which
contended for dominance as the church strove to
define itself and to establish its place in the world.

Cross-listed: HIST 670.
RELS 671 Development of Christian
Doctrine (3 sem. hrs.)
Does Christian doctrine necessarily develop or is
it delivered once and for all in the Bible? This
question forms the main concern of this course as
it exposes students to the idea of doctrinal
development in Christian theology. Through a
selection of ideas, persons, issues, and institutions
that have contributed to the idea of doctrinal
development it encourages students to grapple
with the inevitable change of history as it relates to
Christian doctrine.

RELS 675 Theology and Method (3
sem. hrs.)
An examination of the methodological approaches
to the study of theology. Methods such as
historical/systematic/dogmatic theology,
dialectical theology, constructive theology,
analytical theology, postmodern/deconstructive
theology, and existential theology will be covered
in terms of the historical roots, main proponents
and fundamental principles of each of these
methods.

Co-requisite(s): RELS 611, 622, 661.

RELS 677 Theologies of Liberation (3
sem. hrs.)
Since the 1960’s Christian theology has undergone
a sea change in Western thought, having shifted
from theoretical concerns of dogma to matters of
praxis and social justice. At the forefront of these
changes there arose a theological movement
broadly known as “Liberation Theology.” Though
the basic form of this movement was born in the
socially repressed regions of Latin America, under
the leadership of Catholic theologians like
Gustavo Gutierrez, the main tenants of its
approach to theology have been adopted and
adapted by many other groups who feel a kinship
with the oppressed peoples of the developing
world. This course explores the main lines of this
approach to theology through a sampling and
analysis of offerings from these various groups,
including, Latin American theology, Black
theology, Feminist/Womanist theology, and
Gay/LGBTQ theologies.




                                                  352
RELS 680 Additional Topics (3 sem.
hrs.)

RELS 681, 682 Special Topics in
Christian Thought (3, 3 sem. hrs.)
An in-depth examination of special topics or
issues in Christian Thought.

Co-requisite(s): RELS 611, 622, 661.

RELS 690 Research Design (1 sem.
hr.)
Research Design introduces students to the
principles of topic selection and thesis
development. Special instructions regarding either
Old Testament or New Testament thesis
development are provided.

RELS 691 Thesis I (4 sem. hrs.)
In Thesis I, which presupposes RELS 690, the
student, in frequent consultation with his/her
advisor, selects a thesis topic and begins research.
The completion of an annotated bibliography, a
summary of relevant scholarly views, and original
translation(s) of relevant primary texts are
required.

RELS 692 Thesis II (4 sem. hrs.)
In Thesis II, which presupposes RELS 691,
students work toward the completion of their
thesis. Minimally, a first draft should be
completed. No grade is assigned for RELS 692
until the thesis is finished, accepted, and
successfully defended. If the thesis is not
completed and defended in the spring semester or
the following summer, the student is to continue
in the program by registering for RELS 695.

RELS 695 Continuous Registration (0
se. hrs.)
Continuous Registration maintains the student’s
enrolment in the program and is taken only when
all required courses are completed and only as a
continuation of the incomplete RELS 692.
Although no credit is given for RELS 695 there is
a fee charged for each semester, including the
summer semester, of Continuous Registration.
Russian
RUSS 101, 102 Introduction to Russian
(3, 3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to the Russian language and
culture. Basic skills of reading, writing, listening,
and speaking are taught, as well as various aspects
of life and culture in countries where Russian is
spoken.

Prerequisite(s): None for 101; RUSS 101 is a
prerequisite to 102. (3-1; 3-1)

RUSS 201, 202 Intermediate Russian I
& II (3, 3 sem. hrs.)
These courses cover the fundamentals of Russian
language and grammar at an intermediate level.
Special emphasis is placed on the development of
oral communication skills, as well as translation
and interpretation. Courses also include a survey
of several prominent Russian authors and their
works.

NB: Presently offered as a directed study.
Prerequisite(s): RUSS 102 for RUSS 201; RUSS
201 for RUSS 202.



SAMC Courses
See Arts, Media and Culture.



Social Sciences
SOCS 305 Research Methods in the
Social Sciences (3 sem. hrs.)
This course provides a survey of empirical
research methods, both qualitative and
quantitative, used in social and political analysis
with practical application of these methods to
such issues as research design; the preparation of a
literature review; the application of quantitative
survey techniques and case study methods;
interviewing techniques; and research ethics.

Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of social
sciences/social studies.



                                                  353
SOCS 383 Social Data Analysis (3 sem.
hrs.)
Social scientists greatly benefit from the use of
statistical analyses in their respective disciplines.
Through a comprehensive investigation of data
description; drawing statistical inference; testing
the significance of differences and relationships
and modeling predictive relationships students will
develop a quantitative and computational inquiry.
Discipline specific experiential learning modules
will be employed where appropriate.

Cross-listed: GENV 383.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of social sciences.

SOCS 385 Qualitative Data Analysis in
the Social Sciences (3 sem. hrs.)
This course will introduce students to various
traditions of qualitative social inquiry and their
associated methodological features. Emphasis will
be placed on the practical application of these
traditions of inquiry as their associated methods of
data collection and analysis are applied in a range
of research settings.

Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of sociology.



Sociology
SOCI 101 Introduction to Sociology (3
sem. hrs.)
Students are invited into using the discipline of
sociology as a mode of inquiry. Through concepts
like the sociological imagination, students
experience the social world around them by
interacting with the norms, values, and beliefs of
local and global cultures.

Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0 or 3-0)

SOCI 105 Introduction to Gender
Studies (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to Gender Studies, an
interdisciplinary field that asks critical questions
about the meanings of sex and gender in society.
Students will examine key issues, questions, and
debates in Gender Studies, both historical and
contemporary, and will analyze the multiple ways
that sex and gender have interacted with and
continue to intersect with race, class, nationality,
and other social identities, including religious
ones.

Prerequisite(s): None.

SOCI 201 Introduction to Human
Services (3 sem. hrs.)
An examination of the basic philosophies and
social influences which underlie the helping
professions and a brief review of the history of
professional human services workers. This course
must be completed successfully before a student
completes a field placement.

Prerequisite(s): SOCI 101. (3-0; 0-0)

SOCI 204 Social Psychology (3 sem.
hrs.)
The relationship between the individual and
society. Motivation, interpersonal relationships,
attitude formation and change, communication,
effective group dynamics, and leadership.

Cross-listed: PSYC 204.
Prerequisite(s): SOCI 101. (3-0 or 3-0)

SOCI 210 Race and Ethnicity (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course introduces students to the concept of
race and ethnicity and to the major theories that
the discipline employs as a means of
understanding race and ethnic relations.

Cross-listed: ANTH 205.
Prerequisite(s): SOCI 101 or ANTH 101.

SOCI 221 Sociology of Family (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course is a sociological examination of
families in society. The emphasis is on the
structural and cultural aspects of family life.
Topics include theories and methods for
understanding families; formation of intimate
relationships; mate selection processes, marriage
and parenting; families over the life course; gender
issues and transitions in families.

Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0 or 3-0)


                                                  354
SOCI 234 Canadian Government and
Politics in Comparative Perspective (3
sem. hrs.)
Provides the student with an overview of the
Canadian system of government in a comparative
approach that includes study of British, American,
and Canadian political and government
institutions and practices. A comparative study of
how basic concepts, principles, and institutions
associated with different expressions of liberal-
democratic governments highlight the diversity of
political experience, reveal the interdependence of
political systems, and show the uniqueness of
Canada’s political system. Particular attention is
given to the manner in which Parliament attempts
to facilitate and develop public policy which
reflects the diverse interests and aspirations of its
citizens.

Cross-listed: POLS 234.
Prerequisite(s): SOCI 101. (3-0 or 3-0)

SOCI 240 Individual and Society (3
sem. hrs.)
This course aims to provide students with an
introductory overview of the micro-level,
interpretive tradition in sociology. Focusing on the
everyday lived reality of human experience and
interaction with social institutions, we will explore
a variety of sociological topics like gender, health
and illness, technology and social problems from a
micro-perspective. This course will help students
understand how humans engage in meaning-
making activity in their day-to-day lives, and how
this, in turn, contributes to the creation of broader
sociological norms and institutions.

Pre-requisite(s): SOCI 101. (3, 0)

SOCI 252 Contemporary Social Issues
(3 sem. hrs.)
An examination of the complex nature of issues
confronting individuals, groups, and society at
large. An examination of the various situations
which produce these issues, the social symptoms
that result, and an evaluation of possible solutions
to social problems.

Prerequisite(s): SOCI 101. (0-0; 3-0)
SOCI 305 Youth and Emerging
Adulthood (3 sem. hrs.)
This course will offer a sociological examination
of youth in society, including identity, sub-
cultures, sexual behavior, music, consumerism,
religion, schooling, work, social problems, and
other issues affecting youth transitions to
adulthood.

Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of sociology
including SOCI 101. (3-0; 0-0)

SOCI 309 Sociological Aspects of
Aging (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of human aging in its sociological,
psychological, and physiological dimensions. An
examination of changing social roles during the
life cycle.

Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of sociology
including the SOCI 101. (3-0; 0-0)

SOCI 315 Globalization (3 sem. hrs.)
The study of culture, social institutions, and
systems from a global perspective. Various
sociological theories and concepts are examined.

Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of Sociology or
Anthropology. (3-0 or 3-0)

SOCI 318 Technology and Social
Change (3 sem. hrs.)
This course provides an analysis of the
relationship between technological advances and
social change. Ideas about which technologies are
to be developed, deployed, or abandoned are
socially constructed. The use of all technologies
has both intended and unintended social
consequences.

Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of sociology
including SOCI 101. (3-0 or 3-0)

SOCI 320 Practicum (3 sem. hrs.)
Students are provided with an opportunity for
experiential learning through a supervised practical
experience with a community or social agency
related to the student's interest and/or future
career plans. Readings, written assignments, and
group meetings invite students to discover a new



                                                355
synthesis of knowledge through integrating theory
and practical experience. Students develop
cognitive complexity as they consider how to
apply the knowledge gained in the social sciences,
to acquire praxis skills, and to experience personal
transformation while serving and empowering
others.

Prerequisite(s): SOCI 201. (3-0; 0-0)

SOCI 325 Sociocultural Aspects of
Sport and Leisure (3 sem. hrs.)
An examination of the sociological and cultural
dynamics of sport and how sport has become a
socializing agent of society and culture. Topics
include religion and sport, women in sport,
minorities and sport, big business of sport, drugs
and sport performance, and sport deviance.

Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of sociology
including SOCI 101. (3-0; 0-0)

SOCI 331 Sociology of Religion (3 sem.
hrs.)
An introduction to the theories and concepts
utilized by sociologists to interpret religious
behaviour and the organization of religion.

Cross-listed: RELS 371.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of sociology
including SOCI 101. (3-0; 0-0)

SOCI 335 Classical Theory (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course explores the ideas of social theorists
central to the development of sociology, the role
of social theory in the social sciences, and its
application to social research.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of sociology
including SOCI 101. (3-0 or 3-0)

SOCI 336 Contemporary Theory (3
sem. hrs.)
An examination of major theoretical perspectives
in sociology, such as functionalism, symbolic
interactionism, phenomenological sociology,
ethnomethodology, neo-Marxism, critical theory,
exchange theory, rational choice, postmodernity,
and globalization.

Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of sociology
including SOCI 101. (3-0; 0-0)

SOCI 340 Religion and Culture in
Canada (3 sem. hrs.)
This course examines the role of religious beliefs
and practices in Canadian culture from a
sociological perspective. Emphasis is on
understanding pluralism, multiculturalism, and
contemporary religious expression in relation to
other social institutions like family, economics,
and politics. Attention is given to cross-cultural
comparisons of religions in Canada.

Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of sociology
including SOCI 101. (3-0 or 3-0)

SOCI 350 Urban Studies (3 sem. hrs.)
This course examines the evolution of the city,
from its earliest pre-industrial roots to cities of the
New Economy, and provides a sociological
analysis of selected urban social issues. The course
explores the urban effect on society and the
various efforts, past and present, to make cities
more livable.

Cross-listed: ANTH 350.
Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of sociology or
anthropology. (3-0 or 3-0)

SOCI 355 Community Development (3
sem. hrs.)
The goal of this course is to clarify thinking about
the use of the term “community,” to explore the
role of community in contemporary society, and
to consider societal and cultural factors that either
promote or undermine the building of
community.

Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of sociology or
anthropology. (3-0 or 3-0)

SOCI 356 Self and Identity (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course offers an in-depth exploration of the
development and applicability of the theoretical
perspective of symbolic interactionism to the
study of self and identity. Students will encounter


                                                   356
the work of several classical and contemporary
theorists on the topic of self and identity including
different perspectives on socialization, self-
presentation, and authenticity. This course will
provide students with a greater understanding of
how broader social institutions and narratives
intertwine with and influence individual self-
narratives, agency, and expression.

Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of sociology
including SOCI 101. (3, 0)

SOCI 360 Research Methods in Social
Sciences (3 sem. hrs.)
An introduction to the concepts and processes of
both qualitative and quantitative social research.
Research processes include problem definition,
data collection, and analysis. Students are expected
to develop research skills through practical
application.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): SOCI 101, 207, and third year
standing.

SOCI 365 Sociology of Education (3
sem. hrs.)
An analysis of the role of the school in culture;
societal trends affecting the institutions and
practices of education; interpretive paradigms and
related research studies; group dynamics in
education; religious, social, and economic factors
and issues in Canadian education.

Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of sociology
including SOCI 101. (3-0 or 3-0)

SOCI 380 Criminology and Justice
An introduction to key concepts and issues in
criminology and to operational practices of the
Canadian criminal justice system. Topics include
principal criminological theories, the social
construction and elements of criminal behaviour,
policing, court structure and procedures,
sentencing, corrections, alternatives, and
contemporary issues.

Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of sociology
including SOCI 101. (3-0 or 3-0)
SOCI 390 Special Topics in Sociology
(3 sem. hrs.)
An examination of the ideas of a particular
theorist, school of thought, or conflicting theories
within the behavioural sciences; or an examination
of particular sociological issues from a theoretical
or empirical perspective.

NB: Students may take this course again for credit
whenever it deals with a different topic.
Prerequisite(s): SOCI 101 and 6 additional sem.
hrs. in sociology or instructor’s consent (3-0 or 3-
0)

SOCI 391 Canadian Governmental
Leadership (3 sem. hrs.)
In the setting of the historical Booth Mansion in
Ottawa, students are invited to explore the history
of Canadian political leadership. Using the
historical method, including research in primary
sources, they will evaluate the leadership of
Canadian Prime Ministers and examine how they
addressed the needs and crises of the nation. By
means of their enquiries into Canada’s political
leadership, students will develop their own
theories of effective leadership.

Cross-listed: HIST/POLS 391.
Prerequisite(s): Admission into Laurentian
Leadership Centre. (3-0 or 3-0)

SOCI 392 Ethics and Public Affairs (3
sem. hrs.)
The philosophical basis for and nature of ethical
decision-making. Recent and contemporary ethical
issues facing leaders in the political, business, and
communication fields. Students observe how
today’s leaders engage ethical dilemmas in the
Ottawa setting of their discipline.

Cross-listed: POLS 392.
Prerequisite(s): Admission into Laurentian
Leadership Centre. (3-0 or 3-0)

SOCI 395 Indigenous Peoples in
Canada (3 sem. hrs.)
This course is an introduction to the culture,
languages, history, and enduring presence of
Indigenous Peoples in Canada. It will explore a
range of indigenous social and cultural formations.



                                                 357
Attention will be given to the cultural, economic,
political, and religious aspects of Indigenous
societies, as well as the changes that have occurred
since the arrival of the Europeans.

Cross-listed: ANTH 395.
Prerequisite(s): ANTH 101 or SOCI 101.

SOCI 400 Critical Issues in Human
Services (3 sem. hrs.)
This seminar explores critical issues which occur
across the helping professions. Basic questions
concerning human nature and the influence of
society are examined. This course also serves as a
capstone course that helps students culminate
their acquired knowledge and prepare for the
transition into a Human Services profession.

Prerequisite(s): SOCI 201 and admission to the
Human Services Program. (0-0; 3-0)

SOCI 405 Globalization and Religion
(3 sem. hrs.)
This course is an analysis of the character of
religion in relationship to globalization. Attention
is paid to the nature of religion in global society,
responses of religions to global change,
religious/theological reflections on the various
meanings of globalization, and the development
of religion as a global culture.

Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of sociology
including SOCI 101 or instructor’s consent. (0-0;
3-0

SOCI 410 Advanced Studies: Race &
Ethnicity (3 sem. hrs.)
An analysis of race and ethnicity including
contemporary theories about racism, ethnic
identity, ethnic relations, nationalism, and
globalization.

Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of sociology
including SOCI 101. (3-0 or 3-0)

SOCI 411 Practicum (3 sem. hrs.)
Students are provided with an opportunity for
experiential learning through a supervised practical
experience with a community or social agency
related to the student's interest and/or future
career plans. Readings, written assignments, and
group meetings invite students to discover a new
synthesis of knowledge through integrating theory
and practical experience. Students develop
cognitive complexity as they consider how to
apply the knowledge gained in the social sciences,
to acquire praxis skills, and to experience personal
transformation while serving and empowering
others.

NB: Pass/Fail course.
Prerequisite(s): SOCI 320 and admission to the
Human Services Program. (0-0; 3-0)

SOCI 418 Social and Political Concepts
of Community in Contemporary
Political Theory (3 sem. hrs.)
Provides the student with an in-depth study of the
social and political concepts of community.
Attention is focused on how recognition of
community brings into play the tension between
individual and collective/group rights. Course
lectures, reading assignments, and in-class
discussion provide an overview of the following
topics: interpretation/hermeneutics of
community, roots of community theory, myth of
community, quest for community, Christian
community, recognition of minority communities
in politics, problems associated with the concept
of community, recognition of group rights, the
liberal-communitarian debate over community,
and problems associated with communitarian
theory.

Prerequisite(s): 6 sem. hrs. of sociology and
third year standing. (3-0 or 3-0)

SOCI 420 Practicum (3 sem. hrs.)
Students are provided with an opportunity for
experiential learning through a supervised practical
experience with a community or social agency
related to the student's interest and/or future
career plans. Readings, written assignments, and
group meetings invite students to discover a new
synthesis of knowledge through integrating theory
and practical experience. Students develop
cognitive complexity as they consider how to
apply the knowledge gained in the social sciences,
to acquire praxis skills, and to experience personal
transformation while serving and empowering
others.



                                                358
NB: Pass/Fail course.
Prerequisite(s): SOCI 411 and admission to the
Human Services Program. (0-0; 3-0)

SOCI 450 Seminar in Sociology (3 sem.
hrs.)
Students analyze and reflect upon major issues in
sociology. This integrative seminar addresses a
variety of methodological, theoretical, and
practical questions.

Prerequisite(s): 12 sem. hrs. of sociology
including SOCI 101 or instructor’s consent. (3-0
or 3-0)



Spanish
SPAN 101 Introduction to Spanish I (3
sem. hrs.)
This course is an introduction to the Spanish
language and culture for students with little or no
previous knowledge of Spanish. The course covers
basic grammar, listening, speaking, reading of
simple texts, and writing skills.

NB: Students with more than two years of high
school Spanish or native speaker ability cannot
take SPAN 101 for credit. See instructor for entry
levels.
Prerequisite(s): None. (3-1; 3-1)

SPAN 102 Introduction to Spanish II
(3 sem. hrs.)
This course is an introduction to the Spanish
language and culture for students with some
knowledge of Spanish. This is a continuation of
SPAN 101 course; grammar, listening, speaking,
reading, and writing skills will be further
developed.

NB: See instructor for entry levels.
Prerequisite(s): SPAN 101, or permission. (3-1;
3-1)

SPAN 201, 202 Intermediate Spanish
(3, 3 sem. hrs.)
This course provides an increased understanding
of Hispanic culture and Spanish language through
the review and expansion of grammar; including a
strong emphasis on oral skills, writing,
comprehension, and pronunciation.

Prerequisite(s): SPAN 101, 102, or instructor’s
consent. (3-1; 3-1)

SPAN 301, 302 Advanced Written and
Oral Spanish (3, 3 sem. hrs.)
This course emphasizes the development of oral
and written skills based on advanced grammar. It
includes an examination of different topics of
popular Hispanic culture.

Prerequisite(s): SPAN 201, 202, or instructor’s
consent. (3-0; 3-0)

SPAN 310 Latin American Culture and
Civilization (3 sem. hrs.)
This course paints a broad picture of society and
culture in Latin America. Various aspects of
culture are discussed, including topics such as
history, art, politics, religion, sports, customs, and
current events in the Hispanic world. Cultural
readings, videos, and websites are used to
stimulate discussion, add insight and knowledge,
and develop the capabilities of the oral language.
Conducted entirely in Spanish.

Prerequisite(s): SPAN 201, 202, or instructor’s
consent. (3-0; 3-0)

SPAN 320 Spanish Culture and
Civilization (3 sem. hrs.)
Conducted entirely in Spanish, this course uses an
historical approach to examine society and culture
in Spain. Various aspects of Spanish culture and
society are discussed: literary works, art, politics,
religion, sports, customs, and current events.
Cultural readings, newspaper and magazine
articles, videos, and websites are used to stimulate
discussion, add insight and knowledge, and
develop the capabilities of the oral language.

Prerequisite(s): SPAN 201, 202. (3-0; 3-0)

SPAN 405, 406 Spanish Peninsular
Literature (3, 3 sem. hrs.)
Survey courses covering selected major authors in
Spanish Peninsular literature from the Middle



                                                   359
Ages to the present. The historic and literary
context of the works is presented and the
influence of Christianity as a significant force
shaping both literature and culture is examined.
All major genres are included. SPAN 405 covers
from the Middle Ages to the eighteenth century.
SPAN 406 includes literature from the early
nineteenth century to the present. Students
consolidate their language skills through the
critical reading of literary texts and the writing of
compositions and essays.

Prerequisite(s): SPAN 302, or instructor’s
consent. (3-0; 3-0)

SPAN 410, 411 Hispanic Latin
American Literature (3, 3 sem. hrs.)
Survey courses covering selected major authors
from Spanish speaking Latin America, from pre-
Columbian times to the present. The historic and
cultural context of the works is examined. SPAN
410 covers up to the mid-nineteenth century.
SPAN 411 covers literature from the end of the
nineteenth century to the present. Students
consolidate their skills through the critical reading
of literary texts, along with written and oral work.

Prerequisite(s): SPAN 302, or instructor’s
consent. (3-0; 3-0)

SPAN 497, 498 Special Topics in
Spanish Literature and Culture (3, 3
sem. hrs.)
Independent, but guided studies in specialized
areas of interest.

Prerequisite(s): SPAN 302, or instructor’s
consent.



Study Skills
SKLS 001 Study Skills (0 sem. hrs.)
A non-credit course in study skills to assist
students in study habits, comprehension, and
improved academic achievement. Topics
addressed in the Study Skills class are time
management; note-taking; effective reading;
memory techniques; test taking and stress;
procrastination and goal setting; critical thinking;
research & paper writing, and vocational direction.
Study Skills 001 is open to all students and is
offered in the fall and spring semesters in 10 one-
hour sessions over 5 weeks starting Add/Drop
week. This course is required for students on
Academic Probation or Academic Accountability
as per University policy.

SKLS 003 Academic Coaching (0 sem.
hrs.)
A non-credit course that provides organizational
assistance and educational coaching designed
specifically to help students improve their
academic performance based on their specific
needs. General topics covered in the academic
coaching program are academic planning,
organization and time management, exam
preparation, research & writing, and
procrastination. Academic Coaching is open to
any student and is offered in the fall and spring
semesters. The coaching sessions occur weekly in
30 minute, one-on-one coaching sessions. This
course is required for students on Academic
Accountability as per university policy.

SKLS 500 Graduate Scholarly
Communication (0 sem. hrs.)
This course is an introduction to graduate-level
scholarly communication, with a focus on
academic expectations for success at the graduate
level. It provides an overview of academic honesty
practices, essay formats and documentation, essay
organization, academic tone, scholarly identity,
and genre conventions.

SKLS 501 Graduate Writing Coaching
(0 sem. hrs.)
Provides individual academic writing consultation
for students in any TWU graduate program.
Focuses on developing personal and scholarly
confidence through a developmental approach to
writing and critical thinking.



Theatre
THTR 101, 102, 301, 302 Production (1,
1, 1, 1 sem. hr.)



                                               360
Students must fulfil assigned technical crew
responsibilities during the semester. (0-1; 0-1)

NB: First course must be 100 level. 300 level
repeatable for credit.

THTR 111 Stagecraft I (2 sem. hrs.)
This course is an introduction to the basics of
stage construction, costume construction, theatre
technology, terminology, and common theatre
practices.

Prerequisite(s): None.

THTR 112 Stagecraft II (2 sem. hrs.)
This course is an introduction to the basics of
stage lighting, sound, theatre technology,
terminology, and common theatre practices.

Prerequisite(s): None.

THTR 130 Introduction to Theatre (3
sem. hrs.)
This course is designed to spark (or increase)
students’ enthusiasm for the theatre arts, helping
them to understand the roles of the many artists
and practitioners involved in the creation of
theatre. Students will gain an appreciation for
dramatic literature and for the process required to
move a play from the page to the stage, and will
investigate the varied origins and boundaries of
the art form. The class will take every opportunity
to involve students in practical exploration of
theatre-making.

NB: Attendance at theatre performances is
required.
Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0; 0-0)

THTR 151, 152, 351, 352 Mainstage (1,
1, 1, 1 sem. hr.)
Students must participate fully as an actor or stage
manager in the semester’s mainstage production.

NB: First course must be 100 level. 300 level
repeatable for credit.
Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0; 0-0)

THTR 153, 154, 353, 354 Ensemble (1,
1, 1, 1 sem. hr.)
Students must participate fully as actors or stage
managers in the semester’s Mainstage/Ensemble
production.

NB: First course must be 100 level. 300 level
repeatable for credit. (0-1; 0-1)

THTR 161 Acting I: Foundations of
Acting (3 sem. hrs.)
An introductory course orienting students toward
open and aggressive participation in performance.
Utilizing theatre games, relaxation techniques,
experiential exercises and improvisation, students
build sensory knowledge of the human experience
and create/interpret scripted scenes through
imaginative inquiry into given circumstances,
character, relationship, objectives, and actions.
The insight and understanding students gain
through building sensory knowledge of their own
feelings, voices, and bodies and then translating
that knowledge while constructing the experience
of another human being builds an appreciation
and empathy for the meaning and values of other
people.

NB: Attendance at theatre performances is
required.
Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0; 0-0)

THTR 162 Acting I: The Actor’s
Process (3 sem. hrs.)
Introduction to scene study and character
development. Students learn the building blocks
of effective acting by applying foundational acting
theory to improvisation, scenes, and monologues.
Students are expected to offer thoughtful critique
of others’ work, a vital part of the learning
process.

NB: Attendance at theatre performances is
required.
Prerequisite(s): THTR 161. (0-0; 3-0)

THTR 175 Voice and Movement I (3
sem. hrs.)
The emphasis in this course is freeing the voice
and body to communicate effectively. Students are
encouraged to discover their own gifts and
abilities, to become comfortable with their voice
and body, and to establish a foundation for future
growth and development. Both voice and


                                                361
movement work are based on discovering proper
alignment and a neutral position from which to
explore. Voice work is designed to teach proper
vocal warm-up; voice care and support; and
elements of resonance, articulation, and
projection. Physical movement exercises include
activities designed to increase body awareness,
flexibility, emotional connection, and
expressiveness. All voice and body work
emphasizes the integration of the actor’s
instrument, the individuality of each person, and
the necessity for authentic embodied
communication. Discoveries will be applied to
acting work in class and on stage, and to everyday
life, as self-presentation affects both public
perception and self-image.

Prerequisite(s): THTR 161. (3-0 or 3-0)

THTR 180 Integration Forum (0 sem.
hrs.)
A seminar for students in all levels of the
program, as well as students involved in
productions. The class incorporates analysis and
critique of productions viewed, as well as
discussion of topical issues in theatre. Particular
attention is given to integration of faith and art
and preparation for a life in the theatre.

NB: Attendance at theatre performances is
required.
Prerequisite(s): None. (0-0 or 0-0)

THTR 210 Technical Theatre (3 sem.
hrs.)
This course introduces students to the techniques,
tools, and materials of many of the areas of
technical theatre and invites them to apply this
knowledge to the creation of the Theatre
Department productions. A grounding in
stagecraft is acquired, including understanding of
theatre organization, shops, stage equipment,
scenery, technical direction, and stage
management. Through work on various crews,
students must integrate theoretical knowledge
from class components with practical experience
in areas such as set construction, lighting,
costume, props, and sound.
NB: This course is for students in the theatre
major, concentration, and minor programs; others
by permission.
Prerequisite(s): THTR 101 or 102. (0-0; 3-0)

THTR 261 Acting II: Scene Studchin3y
(3 sem. hrs.)
Students apply principles learned in THTR 161
and THTR 162 to the preparation and
presentation of scenes from contemporary plays.
Script analysis, character development, subtext,
action, and objective are explored through
personalized coaching.

NB: Attendance at theatre performances is
required.
Prerequisite(s): THTR 161, 162. (3-0; 0-0)

THTR 262 Acting II: Advanced Scene
Study (3 sem. hrs.)
A continuation of THTR 261, students work to
access and express the emotional lives of
characters through natural, truthful behaviour.

NB: Attendance at theatre performances is
required.
Prerequisite(s): THTR 161, 162, 261. (0-0; 3-0)

THTR 275 Voice and Movement II (3
sem. hrs.)
A continuation of the work begun in THTR 175,
this course encourages students to further develop
their physical and vocal instruments, seeking
deeper exploration and more creative expression.

NB: Attendance at theatre performances is
required.
Prerequisite(s): THTR 161, 175. (3-0 or 3-0)

THTR 290 Introductory Special
Topics in Theatre (3 sem. hrs.)
Topics vary from year to year.

Prerequisite(s): Vary depending on topic.

THTR 314 Stage Lighting (3 sem. hrs.)
The study of lighting theory and practice for the
stage: fundamentals of light, basics of electricity,
lighting equipment and its use, historical overview
of lighting for theatre productions, examination of



                                                 362
current lighting methodology, introduction to
lighting design. This course is two hours of lecture
and four hours of lab each week.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): THTR 111, 112, 130, and
permission of the instructor. (2-4 or 2-4)

THTR 315 Theatrical Design (3 sem.
hrs.)
An introduction to the principles of design and
their application for the theatre. Includes: (1) play
analysis focusing on visual and spatial design
requirements; (2) research into period styles as
well as practise in adapting and recreating styles
for the stage; and; (3) drawing, mechanical
drafting, painting, and model making. Attendance
at outside performances may be required.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): THTR 130, 210. (2-4 or 2-4)

THTR 321 Directing (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of the art and practice of directing, this
course begins with an understanding of the
director’s role and an appreciation for the traits of
successful directors. Students read basic directing
theory, analyze play scripts, direct scenes, and
critique the work of other directors. Activities are
designed to develop students’ communication and
conceptualization skills, aesthetic sense, and
critical faculties. Students have opportunity to
observe directors at work and to attend guest
lectures by professional directors.

NB: Attendance at theatre performances is
required.
Prerequisite(s): THTR 130, 162, 210 and upper
level standing; or instructor’s consent. (3-0; 0-0)

THTR 325 Playwriting (3 sem. hrs.)
Playwriting is a workshop course designed for any
student interested in developing their storytelling
skills by writing for the stage. Students will study
major components of playwriting, including
dramatic formatting, structure, plot, and character
development, writing actionable dialogue, analysis,
dramaturgy, and more. Students will deepen their
understanding of these components and of the
creative process through writing exercises,
pitching ideas, reading work out loud, and
respectfully providing and receiving feedback. By
the end of the semester, students will have written
one or more plays.

NB: Attendance at theatre performances is
required.
Cross-listed: MCOM 362.
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 103, 104.

THTR 331 Theatre History I: Origins
to 1660 (3 sem. hrs.)
Theatre History I instils in students the knowledge
that to understand the present and prepare for the
future, they must first come to terms with the past
by engaging in methodical research of archival
documents and artifacts from the early years of
European and Asian Theatre. In training students
to grasp the intimate relation between past events,
present circumstances, and future possibilities, this
mode of inquiry equips them to apply that past to
theatre practice and to become engaged, socially
responsible citizens. It also teaches students that
all accounts of past events are shaped by the
interpretive practices of the historian, enabling
them to detect and interrogate the ideological
dimension of historiography.

NB: Attendance at theatre performances is
required. Not offered every year. See department
chair.
Prerequisite(s): THTR 130; SAMC 111 and 112.
(0-0; 3-0)

THTR 332 Theatre History II: 1660 to
the Present (3 sem. hrs.)
Theatre History II instils in students the
knowledge that to understand the present and
prepare for the future, they must first come to
terms with the past by engaging in methodical
research of archival documents and artifacts of the
modern and contemporary eras. In training
students to grasp the intimate relation between
past events, present circumstances, and future
possibilities, this mode of inquiry equips them to
apply that past to theatre practice and to become
engaged, socially responsible citizens. It also
teaches students that all accounts of past events
are shaped by the interpretive practices of the
historian, enabling them to detect and interrogate
the ideological dimension of historiography.



                                                 363
NB: Attendance at theatre performances is
required. Not offered every year. See department
chair.
Prerequisite(s): THTR 130, SAMC 111 and 112.
(0-0; 3-0)

THTR 341 Shakespeare I (3 sem. hrs.)
An intensive study of selected works by William
Shakespeare situated in their Elizabethan and
Jacobean contexts. Works studied may include the
sonnets, the history plays, Henry IV (Parts 1 and 2)
or Henry V; the comedies, A Midsummer Night’s
Dream and As You Like It; the problem play,
Measure for Measure; the tragedies, King Lear and
Macbeth, and the romance Cymbeline.

NB: Not offered every semester. See department
chair.
Cross-listed: ENGL 351.
Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing; or 6 sem. hrs. of English
and 3 sem. hrs. of theatre and third or fourth year
standing; or instructor’s consent. (0-0; 3-0)

THTR 342 Shakespeare II (3 sem.
hrs.)
An intensive study of selected works by William
Shakespeare situated in their Elizabethan and
Jacobean contexts. Works studied may include
Venus and Adonis, the history play, Richard III;
the comedy, The Merchant of Venice; the
tragedies Titus Andronicus, Hamlet, and Antony
and Cleopatra; and the romances, The Winter’s
Tale and The Tempest.

NB: Offered alternate years with THTR 341.
Cross-listed: ENGL 352.
Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing; or 6 sem. hrs. of English
and 3 sem. hrs. of theatre and third or fourth year
standing; or instructor’s consent. (0-0; 3-0)

THTR 343 Canadian Drama (3 sem.
hrs.)
A survey of Canadian plays, starting with the first
official play written in North America (a
seventeenth century Canadian play) and
progressing to twenty-first century dramatists and
their texts. Students will engage in detailed
analyses of plays: their structures,
historical/cultural contexts, and present-day
relevance. The plays explore a variety of topics
and themes, including but not limited to family
life, social issues, class struggles, oppression, and
marginalization. Students will also read plays
about Indigenous culture and plays by Indigenous
writers.

NB: Attendance at theatre performances is
required. Not offered every year. See department
chair
Cross-listed: ENGL 393.
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 103, 104; third or fourth
year standing or instructor's consent.

THTR 344 Modern Drama (3 sem.
hrs.)
A study of eight to ten modern plays - British,
American, and Canadian - representing different
forms and approaches to drama in the last 100
years.

NB: Attendance at theatre performances is
required. Not offered every year. See department
chair.
Cross-listed: ENGL 394.
Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing; or 6 sem. hrs. of English
and 3 sem. hrs. of theatre and third or fourth year
standing; or instructor’s consent. (3-0 or 0-0)

THTR 345 Irish Drama (3 sem. hrs.)
A survey of the dramatic literature of Ireland,
focusing on twentieth century plays from Yeats to
Beckett and Friel. After a quick review of the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the course
turns to the drama of Irish nationalism and
follows its development into the international
arena.

NB: Attendance at theatre performances is
required. Not offered every semester. See
department chair.
Cross-listed: ENGL 395.
Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing; or 6 sem. hrs. of English
and 3 sem. hrs. of theatre and third or fourth year
standing; or instructor’s consent. (3-0; 0-0)

THTR 346 American Drama (3 sem.
hrs.)


                                                  364
A survey of significant American dramatic
literature. Beginning with a brief background of
eighteenth and nineteenth century drama
influenced by European styles, the course
progresses to Eugene O’Neill, widely considered
to be the dramatist to define a distinct American
voice in the theatre. This course then examines
the work of significant playwrights such as Arthur
Miller, Lillian Hellman, Tennessee Williams, Tony
Kushner, Lorraine Hansberry and others, and
includes a component on “the book musical”.

NB: Attendance at theatre performances is
required. Not offered every year. See department
chair.
Cross-listed: ENGL 396.
Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing; or 6 sem. hrs. of English
and 3 sem. hrs. of theatre and third or fourth year
standing; or instructor’s consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

THTR 347 Drama of Japan (3 sem.
hrs.)
A survey of classical Japanese drama in English
translation. The Noh drama of the fourteenth
through sixteenth centuries and the Bunraku and
Kabuki drama of the seventeenth through
nineteenth centuries. An examination of the
impact of these forms on film theory in the
twentieth century.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 103, 104; upper level
standing. (3-0 or 3-0)

THTR 348 World Drama (3 sem. hrs.)
“World Drama is a survey course of the dramatic
literature of the past 2500 years, from classic
nationalist drama to the global contemporary
drama of the twenty-first century. Students will
explore social and global issues such as war, class
struggle, gender inequality, dysfunctional family
life, and more, from past times and today, in the
context of the drama of different world cultures.”
World Drama is a course of reading, discussion,
and audience response to live performances of
global drama from differing cultures and times (in
English translation). The course will entail both
the reading of major plays and attendance of live
performances of world dramatic masterpieces that
are available at theatres in the Lower Mainland of
British Columbia. Though designed for Theatre
and English students, the course is of great value
to any student who wishes a broader knowledge
of world culture through its varied theatrical
expressions. Play choices are made to avoid
overlap with other dramatic literature currently
taught in both the Theatre and English
departments, where advisable.

NB: Attendance at theatre performances is
required. Not offered every year. See department
chair.
Cross-listed: ENGL 348.
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 103, 104, upper level
standing. (3-0 or 3-0)

THTR 361 Acting III: Styles of Acting
(3 sem. hrs.)
An advanced scene-study class exploring acting
styles of various historical periods with a view
towards presentation to contemporary audiences.

NB: Attendance at theatre performances is
required. Not offered every year. See department
chair.
Prerequisite(s): THTR 161, 162, 261, 262, 275.
(3-0.0-0)

THTR 362 Acting III: Shakespeare (3
sem. hrs.)
An advanced scene-study class exploring
Shakespeare in performance. Students are
expected to carefully analyze assigned
Shakespearean texts as part of their preparation.

NB: Not offered every year.
Prerequisite(s): THTR 161, 162, 261, 262, 275.
(0-0; 3-0)

THTR 375 Voice and Movement III (3
sem. hrs.)
Building on previous voice and movement
courses, this course encourages students to further
develop their physical and vocal instruments,
seeking deeper exploration and more creative
expression.

NB: Attendance at theatre performances is
required.
Prerequisite(s): THTR 261, 275. (3-0 or 3-0)



                                                365
THTR 383 Drama for Church Ministry
(3 sem. hrs.)
A study of the broad range of issues involved in
leading a church drama ministry. The course
focuses on writing and directing, and provides an
overview of the various facets of production
relevant to mounting dramatic works of various
types in a church setting. Issues relating to staffing
and leadership are also covered.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): THTR 161, 130, or permission
of the instructor. (3-0 or 3-0)

THTR 390 Special Topics in Theatre
(3 sem. hrs.)
Topics vary from year to year.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): Vary according to specifics of
course. (3-0 or 3-0)

THTR 391 Developmental Drama (3
sem. hrs.)
This course examines various modes of children’s
theatre: puppetry, mask, reader’s theatre,
storytelling, and plays that have been written for
children and participators. This course is
recommended for future educators.

Prerequisite(s): ENGL 103, 104, third or fourth
standing and instructor’s consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

THTR 392 Theatre with Children (3
sem. hrs.)
An introduction to the use of drama in the
classroom and for educational purposes. This
course is recommended for future educators.

Prerequisite(s): ENGL 103, 104, third or fourth
standing and instructor’s consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

THTR 441 Drama to 1642 (3 sem. hrs.)
A study of English drama from its liturgical
origins to the closing of the theatres in 1642,
including medieval mystery cycles and morality
plays, as well as works by Elizabethan, Jacobean,
and Caroline playwrights.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: ENGL 451.
Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing; or 6 sem. hrs. of English
and 3 sem. hrs. of theatre and third or fourth year
standing; or instructor’s consent. (3-0; 0-0)

THTR 442 Eighteenth Century Drama
(3 sem. hrs.)
A survey of the English drama of the eighteenth
century. An examination of representative works
of the London stage and comparative continental
dramas, in transition and in cultural context.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Cross-listed: ENGL 462.
Prerequisite(s): 9 sem. hrs. of English and third
or fourth year standing; or 6 sem. hrs. of English
and 3 sem. hrs. of theatre and third or fourth year
standing; or instructor’s consent. (3-0 or 3-0)

THTR 461 Acting IV: Auditioning (3
sem. hrs.)
An overview and exploration of the skills and
resources needed to successfully audition for live
theatre or graduate school. Students prepare
monologues and songs, develop an acting resume,
and improve improvisation and cold reading skills
relevant to auditions.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): THTR 161, 162, 261, 262, 175,
275. (3-0; 0-0)

THTR 462 Acting IV: From Stage to
Screen (3 sem. hrs.)
Open to advanced acting students, this course
requires an ability to understand and apply acting
theory, a thorough knowledge of the language of
the actor, and an ability to express oneself
physically and vocally. Under the mentorship of a
professional stage and screen actor, students learn
to adapt their training to work for the camera.
Scene work is performed on camera, increasing
students’ comfort level, and providing a solid
grounding in the technical considerations and
language of the medium. Auditioning for film is
also covered.

NB: Not offered every year. See department chair.
Prerequisite(s): THTR 161, 162, 261, 262, 175,
275. (0-0; 3-0)


                                                366
THTR 475 Voice and Movement IV (3
sem. hrs.)
This course encourages students to further
develop their physical and vocal instruments,
seeking deeper exploration and more creative
expression.

NB: Attendance at theatre performances is
required.
Prerequisite(s): THTR 175, 262, 275, 375. (3-0
or 3-0)

THTR 480 Senior Seminar:
Christianity and Theatre (3 sem. hrs.)
This senior seminar course is a retrospective of
the 2000-year relationship between the Christian
church and the theatre as institutions. Students
will explore the views of historical theoreticians
such as Plato, Aristotle, St. Augustine of Hippo,
Francis Schaeffer, and Dorothy Sayers as well as
contemporary Christian thinkers about the role of
the arts (especially theatre) in culture. Students will
examine and develop their own perspectives on
the role of theatre in culture as an agent of change,
and explore how their callings as Christians and
theatre artists will contribute to the theatre
industry after graduation.

NB: Attendance at theatre performances is
required.
Prerequisite(s): THTR 130, 231 or 232; third or
fourth year standing. (3-0 or 3-0)

THTR 498 Professional Orientation (3
sem. hrs.)
This course is designed to prepare students for a
career in the theatre. Topics include resume and
headshot preparation, financial management,
interview skills, introduction to professional
theatres, networking opportunities, self-
production, creating a demo reel, getting an agent,
establishing community, discipline and
perseverance, and understanding Equity.

Prerequisite(s): Upper level standing. (3-0 or 3-0)

THTR 499 Professional Internship (3
sem. hrs.)
A supervised field placement enabling a student to
work in the professional theatre. Students must
spend a minimum of 100 hours in supervised
work with an approved theatre company.

Prerequisite(s): THTR 130, 161, 162; third or
fourth year standing and department approval. (3-
0 or 3-0)



University
Preparation
UNIV 110 Scholarly Inquiry and
Research Methods (2 sem. hrs.)
Introduction to the skills and tools of information
research in a high tech environment, beginning
with topic analysis and ending with a sound,
analytical research report. Emphasis is placed on
development of critical thinking strategies, within
the conventions of scholarly inquiry that are
transferable to most information tasks. Skills
developed through this course will have
marketplace application.

Prerequisite(s): None.

UNIV 301 Lifelong Learning Strategies
(2 sem. hrs.)
This required introductory course is designed to
prepare and equip the adult learner for academic
competency and personal learning success for life.
It focuses on adult and lifelong learning in
conjunction with your discipline and self-
discovery.

Prerequisite(s): None.

UNIV 302 Recognition of Prior
Learning (1 sem. hr.)
This course is the first step in an educational
process designed to facilitate the review of prior
experiential learning for the purpose of awarding
appropriate academic credit. The educational
process culminates with the completion of a
learning portfolio. The portfolio is the means by
which academic assessors determine what has
been learned through non-traditional or non-
formal education settings, and what credit, if any,
should be awarded for the learning demonstrated.



                                                367
Prerequisite(s): None.



Worship Arts
WRSH 101 Worship Foundations (3
sem. hrs.)
A foundational study of worship theology and
practice. The course will begin with an
introduction to biblical worship theology and
practice, then survey church worship history from
Pentecost to the present day, examining the role
of music and the arts in the context of changes
and cultural adaptations in worship theology and
practice.

NB: Not offered every year
Prerequisite(s): none.
Co-requisite(s): RELS 111 or 102. (3-0; 3-0)

WRSH 201 Worship and Culture (3
sem. hrs.)
An examination of trends and issues in the
contemporary church’s worship practice,
especially in the context of the larger cultural
shifts in the West since the 1960’s. Students
explore the divergent responses to the “worship
wars” of the 1980’s, especially the emphasis on
music and musical style, and various more recent
approaches to worship practice and ministry in a
postmodern culture.

NB: Not offered every year.
Prerequisite(s): WRSH 101, or permission of
instructor.

WRSH 239 Songs of Faith (3 sem. hrs.)
An examination of meanings and purposes of
sacred/church ‘song’ in the context of the
believing community, from OT Psalm to early
church hymn, chant to Reformation hymn, revival
hymn and gospel song to contemporary worship
chorus. The course will be concerned with seeing
the varied musical and textual expression of God’s
people throughout their history, understanding
these expressions within the worship culture of
their time, and appreciating the breadth of
repertoire of the church’s songs.

NB: Not offered every year.
Cross-listed: MUSI 239.
Prerequisite(s): WRSH 101.

WRSH 301 Worship and Leadership (3
sem. hrs.)
An examination of leadership issues in the
worship practices of the contemporary evangelical
church. Through exploration of a range of
approaches to the arts, liturgy, worship
evangelism, service design, and curation, the
course is concerned with (1) theological and
philosophical leadership issues for a biblical
worship practice in a postmodern culture, and (2)
practical concerns relating to development of a
vibrant local church worship ministry.

NB: Not offered every year.
Cross-listed: MUSI 309.
Prerequisite(s): RELS 111, 112, and upper level
standing.

WRSH 321 Creative Worship (3 sem.
hrs.)
An interdisciplinary creative course for the
development of new artistic expression for use in
the church. The course is designed for student
practitioners of music, video, drama, and visual
art. Students work with artists in their field, on
their own and in groups, towards a workshop
presentation of new works. The course facilitates
the releasing of new creations for the church, and
teaches principles of affirming and releasing the
giftedness of others.

Prerequisite(s): Upper level standing or
permission.

WRSH 401 Worship Design (3 sem.
hrs.)
A study of the principles and practices of
designing effective worship services for a variety
of contexts. This course is the classroom
component related to local church practica,
WRSH/MUSI 402 and 403.

NB: Not offered every year.
Cross-listed: MUSI 401.
Co-requisite(s): WRSH 402.
Prerequisite(s): WRSH 201, 301, and upper level
standing.



                                                368
WRSH 402 Worship Practicum I (1
sem. hrs.)
A local church practicum covering the entire
semester, with scheduled involvement to be
determined early in the semester in cooperation
with the ministry leadership of the local church. It
is expected that the student is given hands on
responsibilities in areas of strength, as well as
opportunities for growth in other areas. The
student works under the immediate supervision of
a staff or qualified lay leader in the local church
and within the general supervision of a TWU
instructor.

NB: Not offered every year. For those involved in
leading worship teams in the practicum, MUSI
320 is required; MUSI 405 is recommended. For
those involved in leading choirs/ensembles in the
practicum, MUSI 405 is required. For those
involved in a dramatic ministry in the practicum,
THTR 383 is required. For those involved in
digital media ministry in the practicum, ART
250/MCOM 231 is required.
Cross-listed: MUSI 402.
Co-requisite(s): WRSH/MUSI 401.
Prerequisite(s): WRSH 201, 301.

WRSH 403 Worship Practicum II (1
sem. hrs.)
A continuation of the local church practicum of
WRSH 402, typically in the same church. The
practicum covers the entire semester, with
scheduled involvement to be determined early in
the semester in cooperation with the ministry
leadership of the local church. It is expected that
hands-on responsibilities in this semester are
increased over those of WRSH 402. The student
works under the immediate supervision of a staff
or qualified lay leader in the local church, and
within the general supervision of a TWU
instructor.

NB: Not offered every year.
Cross-listed: MUSI 403.
Prerequisite(s): WRSH/MUSI 402.
WRSH 490 Topics in Worship Studies
(1-3 sem. hrs.)
A senior seminar course involving specific topics
pertinent to worship in the contemporary church.
The topics may relate to guest lectures and
presentations.

NB: Not offered every year.
Prerequisite(s): Upper level standing.



Writing
WRTG 100 Writing in the University
Context (3 sem. hrs.)
This course is designed to improve the reading,
writing, and critical thinking skills of students
whose first language is English. Students are
required to read an array of essays, discuss them
critically, and write papers analyzing the structure
and content of these essays.

NB: Only one of WRTG 100 or 101 may be taken
for credit.
Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0; 3-0)

WRTG 101 Writing and Culture (3 sem.
hrs.)
A preparatory course in academic writing,
focusing on academic conventions, scholarly
vocabulary and tone, and the development of
cohesive arguments across the disciplines. While
the tasks and assignments emphasize writing skills,
the course also facilitates the growth of critical
thinking skills through the thematic study of
North American and Christian culture. This
course is designed for students who have come
from international contexts.

NB: Only one of WRTG 100 or 101 may be
taken for credit.
Prerequisite(s): None. (3-0; 3-0)




                                                 369
